



Network Working Group                                         I. Schrock
Internet-Draft                                     EMILIA Protocol, Inc.
Intended status: Informational                         27 September 2026
Expires: 31 March 2027


  Authorization Evidence Chains: Composing Heterogeneous Agent-Action
                           Evidence (EP-AEC)
            draft-schrock-ep-authorization-evidence-chain-07

Abstract

   Consequential agent actions can produce heterogeneous identity,
   delegation, policy, permit, approval, transparency, capability, and
   execution artifacts.  Each artifact can verify under its own
   specification while still referring to a different action, filling a
   different evidentiary role, or failing a relying party's freshness,
   status, or inter-artifact binding requirement.  This document defines
   the Authorization Evidence Chain (EP-AEC): a transport-agnostic
   composition object and a fail-closed evaluation algorithm that keeps
   native cryptographic verification separate from relying-party
   acceptance, establishes exact material-action matching, and evaluates
   a relying-party-pinned evidence requirement.

   AEC produces SATISFIED or UNSATISFIED and a replayable evaluation
   record.  SATISFIED means only that the presented evidence filled the
   relying party's named evidence requirement at the stated verification
   time.  It is not a universal authorization decision, a policy
   language for the protected application, or proof of execution or
   outcome.  The executor makes the separate local AUTHORIZED decision
   and controls consumption, invocation, and effect handling.
   Qualification evidence can fill a named evidence role but cannot
   authorize an action by itself.  AEC introduces no new component
   receipt type and does not replace any native verifier.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.







Schrock                   Expires 31 March 2027                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains       September 2026


   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 31 March 2027.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.1.  Scope and Non-Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  The Authorization Evidence Chain Object . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4.  The Relying-Party Evidence Requirement  . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   5.  Relying-Party Acceptance Inputs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   6.  Native Verification and Normalized Facts  . . . . . . . . . .   8
   7.  Material-Action Matching  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   8.  Requirement Expressions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   9.  Verification Algorithm  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   10. Evidence Evaluation Replay  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   11. Human-Authorization Components  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   12. Bounded-Capability Operation Components . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   13. Position in the Effect-Boundary Lifecycle . . . . . . . . . .  15
   14. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   15. Privacy Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   16. Relationship to Other Work  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   17. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   18. Changes in -07  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   19. Changes in -06  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
   20. Changes in -05  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
   21. Implementation Status . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
   22. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
     22.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
     22.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21



Schrock                   Expires 31 March 2027                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains       September 2026


   Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22

1.  Introduction

   One consequential action can produce several independently useful
   artifacts: a workload credential, a delegation record, a policy
   permit, a named-human authorization receipt, a quorum, a bounded-
   capability operation record, or a transparency receipt.  These
   artifacts answer different questions.  A relying party may require
   several of them for one action.

   Native validity is not sufficient for composition.  A valid permit
   for action A and a valid approval for action B do not jointly
   authorize either action.  Likewise, two valid artifacts can still be
   inadequate if the relying party required a fresher approval, a
   checked revocation status, or a byte-backed relation showing that one
   artifact explicitly references another.

   EP-AEC provides the thin composition layer.  It dispatches artifacts
   to their native verifiers, maps only integrity-protected native
   action commitments to the relying party's expected material action,
   evaluates an evidence requirement owned by the relying party, and
   records the exact inputs to that evidence decision.  It does not
   decide whether the protected application should act.

1.1.  Scope and Non-Goals

   This document defines:

   *  the EP-AEC-v1 composition object;

   *  the EP-AEC-REQUIREMENT-v1 relying-party evidence requirement;

   *  a verifier-result contract that keeps native verification,
      relying-party acceptance, and material-action mapping separate;

   *  a fail-closed SATISFIED or UNSATISFIED evaluation; and

   *  the EP-AEC-REPLAY-v1 evaluation record and replay digest.

   This document does not define a universal evidence taxonomy, a
   general authorization policy language, a component receipt format, an
   application allow or deny decision, a signed reliance-result format,
   a transparency service, or an execution state machine.  It does not
   require a graph wire format or make presenter-asserted graph edges
   authoritative.




Schrock                   Expires 31 March 2027                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains       September 2026


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

   BCP 14 is indexed by the RFC Editor at [BCP14].

   Native verifier  A verifier selected by the relying party for one
      artifact format and revision.  For each artifact it reports two
      separate results, VERIFIED and ACCEPTED (Section 6).

   VERIFIED  The native verifier's cryptographic and structural checks
      passed: the artifact is well formed under the native format rules
      the verifier implements, and every signature or proof it carries
      verifies over the bytes it covers.  VERIFIED depends only on the
      artifact, the format specification, and the verification key.  It
      says nothing about whether the relying party trusts that key,
      issuer, or policy, and nothing about whether the artifact denotes
      the expected material action.

   ACCEPTED  A VERIFIED artifact also meets the relying party's pinned
      trust inputs for its component type (Section 5): the verification
      key is, or chains to, a trust anchor or directory entry pinned for
      that component's role and is usable at the verification time; the
      issuer, audience, key class, native policy, and format revision
      are ones the relying party pinned; and the verification time falls
      within the artifact's native validity period.  ACCEPTED is
      relative to one relying party's pins.  A party with different
      trust inputs can reproduce VERIFIED for the same bytes and reach a
      different acceptance result.

   MATCH  A VERIFIED and ACCEPTED artifact's integrity-protected native
      action commitment denotes the relying party's expected material
      action by direct exact digest equality or by an exact, relying-
      party-pinned CAID mapping profile.

   SATISFIED  Eligible evidence filled the relying party's evidence
      requirement at the explicit verification time.

   UNSATISFIED  Every evaluation result other than SATISFIED, including
      an evaluation that could not complete.  UNSATISFIED does not by
      itself mean that evidence was shown to be missing or invalid;
      bounded reason codes say why.

   AUTHORIZED  A separate local application decision permitting an



Schrock                   Expires 31 March 2027                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains       September 2026


      invocation.  AEC does not produce this state.

   Evidence digest  The string "sha256:" followed by the lowercase
      hexadecimal SHA-256 digest of an artifact's JCS [RFC8785]
      serialization.

   Normalized evidence fact  A verifier-produced, bounded record of the
      VERIFIED and ACCEPTED results, material-action mapping, time and
      status checks, and byte-backed bindings for one component.  It is
      not supplied by the presenter.

3.  The Authorization Evidence Chain Object

   {
     "@version": "EP-AEC-v1",
     "action": { "...": "Action Object" },
     "action_digest": "sha256:<hex>",
     "action_caid": "caid:1:<action-type>:<suite>:<digest-b64url>",
     "components": [
       {
         "type": "ep-quorum",
         "label": "two-person human authorization",
         "evidence_digest": "sha256:<hex>",
         "evidence": { "...": "native artifact" }
       },
       {
         "type": "policy-permit",
         "evidence": { "...": "native artifact" }
       }
     ],
     "requirement": "ep-quorum AND policy-permit"
   }

   *  @version (string, REQUIRED) MUST equal EP-AEC-v1.

   *  action (object, REQUIRED) is the closed Action Object to which the
      evaluation is joined.

   *  action_digest (string, OPTIONAL) is descriptive.  When present, it
      MUST equal the verifier's recomputation over action.

   *  action_caid (string, OPTIONAL) is descriptive.  It MUST NOT
      establish its own mapping or trust.  When the relying party
      requires a CAID, the verifier recomputes or independently obtains
      the expected CAID and compares it as specified in Section 7.






Schrock                   Expires 31 March 2027                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains       September 2026


   *  components (array, REQUIRED and non-empty) contains type (string),
      evidence (JSON value suitable for the native format), and optional
      label and evidence_digest strings.  A label is display-only.  When
      an evidence digest is present, the verifier MUST recompute and
      compare it before native verification.

   *  requirement (string, OPTIONAL) is a presenter-supplied
      description.  It MUST NOT become the relying party's sufficiency
      bar and MUST NOT produce SATISFIED.

   The chain is a bundle, not an authority-bearing graph.  Component
   order is preserved for reporting, but order confers no semantics.
   All credited relations between components come from integrity-
   protected native bytes exposed by a trusted native verifier, never
   from labels, ordering, or presenter-supplied edges.

4.  The Relying-Party Evidence Requirement

   Before returning SATISFIED, a verifier MUST receive an EP-AEC-
   REQUIREMENT-v1 object from relying-party-controlled configuration.
   The chain document cannot supply or weaken it.

   {
     "@version": "EP-AEC-REQUIREMENT-v1",
     "requirement_id": "treasury-wire-evidence@7",
     "purpose": "pre-execution evidence check",
     "expression": "ep-quorum AND policy-permit",
     "freshness_sec": {
       "ep-quorum": 300,
       "policy-permit": 600
     },
     "status_required": ["ep-quorum"],
     "role_constraints": [
       {
         "type": "distinct-subject-quorum",
         "component_type": "ep-human-authorization",
         "threshold": 2,
         "subject_id_source": "native-verifier"
       }
     ],
     "required_bindings": [
       {
         "from_type": "policy-permit",
         "relation": "permits",
         "to_type": "ep-quorum"
       }
     ]
   }



Schrock                   Expires 31 March 2027                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains       September 2026


   *  @version MUST equal EP-AEC-REQUIREMENT-v1.

   *  requirement_id is a relying-party identifier for the exact
      evidence requirement revision.  It carries no authority by itself.

   *  purpose is descriptive and MUST NOT alter expression evaluation.

   *  expression is REQUIRED and follows Section 8.

   *  freshness_sec is an OPTIONAL map from component type to a non-
      negative maximum age in seconds.

   *  status_required is an OPTIONAL array of component types for which
      a fresh authenticated status result is required.

   *  role_constraints is an OPTIONAL array of closed evidence
      constraints.  This revision defines only distinct-subject-quorum.
      Its component_type names an evidence role, threshold is an integer
      greater than one, and subject_id_source MUST equal native-
      verifier.  A verifier counts distinct subjects only from
      integrity-protected native subject identifiers returned by
      eligible native verifiers.  Presenter labels, signer-key
      encodings, and unverified subject claims MUST NOT be counted.

   *  required_bindings is an OPTIONAL array of from_type, relation, and
      to_type triples.  Each triple requires at least one eligible
      source component whose native verified bytes bind, under that
      relation, the evidence digest of an eligible target component of
      the named type.

   The verifier MUST compute the requirement profile digest over the JCS
   serialization of the complete requirement object.  The requirement
   object controls evidence sufficiency only.  Application rules about
   amounts, destinations, operator permissions, legal authority, risk
   acceptance, or whether to execute remain in the separate local
   authorization policy.

   Initiator exclusion, executor exclusion, durable one-time
   consumption, resource ceilings, and whether to execute are boundary
   constraints rather than evidence-sufficiency constraints.  They are
   defined and enforced by the Action Evidence Boundary [EP-AEB].  AEC
   MUST NOT report them as satisfied merely because an evidence
   component asserts them.








Schrock                   Expires 31 March 2027                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains       September 2026


5.  Relying-Party Acceptance Inputs

   Internal agreement among presenter-supplied artifacts cannot satisfy
   a relying party.  The verifier MUST receive these values from trusted
   configuration or from the protected boundary that is about to act:

   *  the EP-AEC-REQUIREMENT-v1 object;

   *  the expected Action Object or its independently computed canonical
      action digest;

   *  an expected CAID and mapping profiles when cross-format action
      mapping is used;

   *  an explicit verification time;

   *  for each component type, the selected native verifier revision;
      the pinned trust inputs that decide ACCEPTED, namely trust anchors
      or key directory, accepted issuers, audiences, key classes, native
      policy, and format revision; and the freshness inputs and status
      sources; and

   *  documented resource limits for parsing, nesting, component count,
      expression size, and verifier execution.

   These values MUST NOT be taken from the presented chain or from an
   untrusted caller.  If any required input is absent, malformed,
   ambiguous, or outside its configured validity, the result is
   UNSATISFIED.

   The pinned trust inputs decide ACCEPTED.  A verifier MUST NOT report
   an artifact as VERIFIED because its signer is pinned, or as ACCEPTED
   because its signatures verify.

6.  Native Verification and Normalized Facts

   AEC does not reinterpret a native signature or token.  For each
   component, a relying-party-selected native verifier first returns a
   bounded internal result containing:

   *  the VERIFIED result and, for a VERIFIED artifact, the ACCEPTED
      result, each with a machine-readable reason when it is negative;

   *  the integrity-protected native action commitment, if any;

   *  the protected issuance and expiration instants needed by the
      selected freshness check;




Schrock                   Expires 31 March 2027                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains       September 2026


   *  the protected issuer, audience, and format revision relevant to
      the selected native profile;

   *  an authenticated status result and status-snapshot digest when
      status checking is required; and

   *  zero or more relation and target-evidence-digest bindings
      extracted from integrity-protected native fields.

   A component reaches VERIFIED only when its native verifier's
   cryptographic and structural checks succeed, and reaches ACCEPTED
   only when it is VERIFIED and the pinned trust inputs for its
   component type accept it.  The native verifier MUST report the two
   results separately.  It MUST NOT report ACCEPTED for an artifact that
   is not VERIFIED, and MUST NOT report VERIFIED for an artifact whose
   integrity it did not check.  When a native procedure checks trust
   inputs and cryptography together and cannot attribute a failure to
   one of them, the verifier reports the artifact as not VERIFIED.  A
   component that is not both VERIFIED and ACCEPTED is ineligible.

   When a format identifies its verification key only by reference, the
   native verifier resolves the key from relying-party key material.  If
   no key can be resolved, the artifact is not VERIFIED.  Resolving a
   key does not make the artifact ACCEPTED: whether that key is pinned
   for the component's role, usable at the verification time, of an
   accepted class, and bound to the principal the artifact names is
   decided by ACCEPTED.

   AEC MUST NOT accept a presenter's verified or accepted Boolean,
   normalized fact, mapping result, key, trust anchor, status assertion,
   or relation as a substitute for native verification or relying-party
   acceptance.

   A deployment in which a protected boundary performs native
   verification before calling the AEC evaluator MAY pass the verifier
   results internally instead of repeating the cryptographic work.  Such
   results MUST carry the VERIFIED and ACCEPTED results separately and
   MUST be integrity-bound inside the same trust boundary to the exact
   evidence digest, native verifier profile digest, trust snapshot, and
   verification time.  Serialized results received from the presenter
   are evidence artifacts of their own and require a native verifier;
   they are not trusted internal results.









Schrock                   Expires 31 March 2027                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains       September 2026


7.  Material-Action Matching

   Native verification, relying-party acceptance, and material-action
   matching are distinct and ordered.  Mapping MUST NOT inspect claims
   from an artifact that is not VERIFIED and ACCEPTED as authoritative
   input.

   1.  The boundary computes the expected action digest from the frozen
       action it is actually preparing to perform.

   2.  The native verifier reports the component VERIFIED and ACCEPTED
       and exposes only its integrity-protected native action
       commitment.

   3.  If that commitment uses the same action representation and digest
       algorithm, exact digest equality establishes MATCH.

   4.  Otherwise, a relying-party-pinned Action-Mapping Profile from
       [CAID] projects the verified native payload to the expected CAID
       action type.  Only the CAID verdict EQUIVALENT_UNDER_PROFILE
       establishes MATCH.

   NOT_EQUIVALENT, INDETERMINATE, an unknown mapping revision, a lossy
   projection, a presenter-selected profile, or a mismatch between the
   projected CAID and the expected CAID is not MATCH and MUST make that
   component ineligible.  CAID carries content identity, not trust or
   authorization semantics.

8.  Requirement Expressions

   The expression grammar uses ABNF and its core rules as defined by
   [RFC5234]:

   expr     = term *(WS operator WS term)
   term     = ident / "(" WS expr WS ")"
   operator = "AND" / "OR" / "&&" / "||"
   ident    = 1*(ALPHA / DIGIT / "." / ":" / "-" / "_")
   WS       = *(SP / HTAB / CR / LF)

   An identifier matches a component type with at least one eligible
   component.  An unknown identifier evaluates to false.
   Implementations MUST use a bounded parser and MUST NOT use a general-
   purpose evaluator.  AND and OR have equal binding strength and are
   evaluated strictly from left to right.  Parentheses are the only
   precedence mechanism.






Schrock                   Expires 31 March 2027                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains       September 2026


   This expression deliberately answers only which evidence roles are
   present.  It has no variables for action parameters, principals,
   entitlements, business risk, or effect state.  Those belong to native
   artifact verification and acceptance, CAID mapping, or local
   authorization.

9.  Verification Algorithm

   Given chain C and the acceptance inputs in Section 5, a verifier MUST
   proceed fail-closed:

   1.  Strictly parse C as I-JSON [RFC7493] and enforce all configured
       resource limits.  Reject duplicate member names, non-integer
       numbers, malformed Unicode, cycles in an in-memory object, and
       unsupported versions.

   2.  Compute the canonical action digest over C.action.  Compare it
       with the executor-owned expected action digest.  If
       C.action_digest is present, compare it too.  Any mismatch yields
       UNSATISFIED.

   3.  Validate and digest the relying-party requirement.  If the only
       available requirement came from C, yield UNSATISFIED.

   4.  For each component in array order:

       a.  Compute its evidence digest.  If a presented evidence digest
           exists and differs, mark the component ineligible.

       b.  Invoke the selected native verifier or consume a trusted
           internal verifier result as constrained by Section 6, and
           record the VERIFIED and ACCEPTED results separately.
           Exceptions, unknown verifier types, a component that is not
           VERIFIED, and a VERIFIED component that is not ACCEPTED are
           ineligible.

       c.  Only after VERIFIED and ACCEPTED, establish material-action
           MATCH under Section 7.  A different or indeterminate action
           makes the component ineligible.

       d.  If the requirement sets a freshness bound for the component
           type, require protected issuance time, verification time
           within the native validity window, and age not exceeding the
           bound.  Future-issued, expired, missing, or malformed times
           make the component ineligible.






Schrock                   Expires 31 March 2027                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains       September 2026


       e.  If status is required for the component type, require an
           authenticated, sufficiently fresh status snapshot under the
           selected native profile.  Revoked, unknown, stale, or
           unauthenticated status makes the component ineligible.

       f.  Record a normalized fact including component index, type,
           evidence digest, native verifier profile digest, trust
           snapshot digest, the VERIFIED result, the ACCEPTED result,
           mapping verdict, freshness and status results, and only the
           byte-backed bindings returned by the native verifier.

   5.  Construct the satisfied type set from eligible components only
       and evaluate the relying-party expression.  Evaluate every
       role_constraints entry over eligible normalized facts only.  A
       failed or indeterminate role constraint yields UNSATISFIED.

   6.  For every required binding, require an eligible source and target
       pair with matching types and a source native fact whose named
       relation binds the target's exact evidence digest.  A label,
       component order, equal action digest, or presenter's relation
       claim does not satisfy a required binding.

   7.  Return SATISFIED only if the expression is true, every required
       binding exists, and every mandatory check in this algorithm
       succeeded.  Otherwise return UNSATISFIED.

   8.  Produce the replay record in Section 10.  Any unexpected error at
       any step yields UNSATISFIED and a bounded reason; it MUST NOT
       yield a partial success.

   The result MUST carry satisfied as a Boolean and SHOULD carry bounded
   per-component reason codes.  Each normalized fact MUST carry the
   VERIFIED and ACCEPTED results as separate fields, and a consumer MUST
   NOT derive one from the other.  Reason codes SHOULD distinguish a
   verification failure from an acceptance refusal.  An implementation
   may retain a legacy allow alias, but that alias MUST equal satisfied
   and MUST NOT be interpreted as local AUTHORIZED.

10.  Evidence Evaluation Replay

   An evaluator MUST be able to emit an EP-AEC-REPLAY-v1 record.  The
   replay record is an evaluation output, not a presenter input:









Schrock                   Expires 31 March 2027                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains       September 2026


   {
     "@version": "EP-AEC-REPLAY-v1",
     "aec_digest": "sha256:<hex>",
     "expected_action_digest": "sha256:<hex>",
     "expected_caid": "caid:1:<action-type>:<suite>:<digest-b64url>",
     "requirement_profile_digest": "sha256:<hex>",
     "verification_time": "2026-07-27T17:00:00Z",
     "facts": [
       {
         "component_index": 0,
         "type": "ep-quorum",
         "evidence_digest": "sha256:<hex>",
         "native_verification": "VERIFIED",
         "acceptance": "ACCEPTED",
         "mapping_verdict": "MATCH",
         "...": "further normalized fact members"
       }
     ],
     "satisfied": true,
     "reasons": []
   }

   The aec_digest is the evidence digest of the complete EP-AEC-v1
   object.  Facts remain in component array order.  Object members
   inside each fact use JCS ordering.  The replay digest is the evidence
   digest of the complete EP-AEC-REPLAY-v1 record.

   In each fact, native_verification is VERIFIED, FAILED, or
   NOT_EVALUATED, and acceptance is ACCEPTED, REJECTED, or
   NOT_EVALUATED.  acceptance is NOT_EVALUATED whenever
   native_verification is not VERIFIED.

   Given the same AEC object, expected action inputs, requirement
   profile, explicit verification time, normalized native facts, and
   algorithm revision, implementations MUST compute the same replay
   digest and SATISFIED result.  ACCEPTED depends on trust snapshots,
   and status checks depend on status services; therefore the replay
   record MUST bind the selected verifier-profile, trust-snapshot, and
   status-snapshot digests needed to identify those inputs.  A party
   that re-runs the evaluation under different trust inputs can
   reproduce the VERIFIED results but not necessarily the ACCEPTED
   results; the trust-snapshot digests identify whose acceptance the
   record reports.  A replay record without the underlying evidence and
   identified trust snapshots can identify a decision but cannot
   independently prove that every recorded native fact was true.






Schrock                   Expires 31 March 2027                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains       September 2026


   The replay digest is not a signature, authorization, transparency
   receipt, or current-status proof.  Another format MAY sign or log it.
   This document intentionally defines no signed reliance-result
   envelope and no legal meaning for a SATISFIED result.

11.  Human-Authorization Components

   AEC does not infer that a generic operator signature, credential,
   policy decision, or attested workload represents a named-human
   approval ceremony.  A relying party that needs an EMILIA human
   authorization or quorum requires ep-authorization-bundle, ep-receipt,
   or ep-quorum explicitly, according to the native artifact's role.

   The ep-authorization-bundle component carries the pre-execution
   Authorization Bundle of [EP-RECEIPTS], Section 6.  Its native
   verifier reports VERIFIED when the bundle's closed structure, context
   commitments, and completed signoff signatures verify, and reports
   ACCEPTED only when the exact expected action, relying-party-selected
   policy, approver keys and key classes, and required status and
   presentation evidence are accepted under that profile.  Distinct
   subjects MUST come only from verified completed signoffs, not from an
   unsigned label or the wider selected approver roster.  A SATISFIED
   bundle is approval evidence, not proof of consumption or execution.

   The ep-receipt built-in reports ACCEPTED only for a VERIFIED Trust
   Receipt that meets a relying-party profile pinning the approver
   directory, accepted key class, WebAuthn RP ID and signed-origin
   allowlist where required, policy hash, log key, maximum evidence age,
   verification time, and fresh registry snapshot as specified by
   [EP-RECEIPTS].  A bare operator envelope is not an ep-receipt human
   leg.  A terminal Trust Receipt and a pre-execution Authorization
   Bundle MUST NOT be substituted for one another.  Verifying a consumed
   receipt does not restore authority or permit another execution.

   The ep-quorum built-in reports ACCEPTED only when the presented
   quorum policy equals the relying-party-pinned policy and the selected
   approver, role, distinctness, origin, ordering, and freshness rules
   of [EP-QUORUM] hold.  A safety-critical profile requiring human
   separation MUST require at least two distinct humans.  A quorum that
   is VERIFIED under presenter-selected keys or a weaker presenter-
   selected policy is not ACCEPTED and is ineligible.

   Credential validity and human operation remain distinct.  A valid
   credential identifies a key holder under its native profile; it does
   not establish that a human operated an agent for this action,
   reviewed the material fields, or held legal authority.





Schrock                   Expires 31 March 2027                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains       September 2026


12.  Bounded-Capability Operation Components

   A static bounded-capability receipt authorizes capability issuance
   and MUST NOT be treated as bound to every later exercise merely
   because the proposed action falls within its scope.

   A bounded-capability-operation component is eligible only when its
   operation record is VERIFIED and ACCEPTED and binds the exact action,
   and the native verifier validates the referenced capability, issuance
   authorization, scope result, and operation record under the relying
   party's pins.  AEC does not query or reserve current budget.  A
   capability component MUST NOT satisfy ep-receipt, ep-quorum, or
   another human role.

13.  Position in the Effect-Boundary Lifecycle

   AEC occupies one deliberately narrow transition in the effect-
   boundary lifecycle described by [EP-AEB]:

   native VERIFIED
     -> relying-party ACCEPTED
     -> material-action MATCH
     -> AEC SATISFIED
     -> local AUTHORIZED
     -> atomic CONSUMED or RESERVED
     -> INVOKED
     -> EXECUTED, FAILED, or INDETERMINATE

   This document splits the VERIFIED step of that lifecycle into two
   results.  An artifact that [EP-AEB] calls VERIFIED, one that passed
   its native verifier under relying-party-selected trust inputs, is
   VERIFIED and ACCEPTED here.

   AEC can orchestrate native verification, acceptance, and mapping
   itself or consume trusted internal results from the same protected
   boundary.  In both arrangements, VERIFIED precedes ACCEPTED, ACCEPTED
   precedes MATCH, and all three precede SATISFIED.  AEC MUST NOT
   collapse ACCEPTED into VERIFIED or SATISFIED into AUTHORIZED, consume
   an authorization, invoke an effect, classify an outcome, or reconcile
   an indeterminate effect.

   One-time consumption is stateful and remains at the effect boundary.
   An offline SATISFIED result cannot prove that another executor has
   not already acted.  A consequential executor uses shared atomic state
   keyed by an executor-derived action instance and preserves an
   uncertain operation instead of blindly replaying it.





Schrock                   Expires 31 March 2027                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains       September 2026


14.  Security Considerations

   *Presenter-selected sufficiency.* A presenter can construct a weak
   requirement that its own evidence satisfies.  The EP-AEC-
   REQUIREMENT-v1 object MUST come from relying-party configuration.
   C.requirement is descriptive only.

   *Presenter-selected action.* Agreement among components proves only
   internal agreement.  The expected action digest and CAID must be
   computed or selected by the protected boundary from the action it is
   actually preparing to perform.

   *Cross-binding.* An attacker can splice individually valid artifacts
   for different actions.  Native verification and acceptance before
   mapping and exact MATCH for each eligible component are required.  A
   label, shared principal, shared session, or similar-looking parameter
   is not a match.

   *Unbacked relations.* A presenter can claim that one artifact
   permits, delegates to, records, or supersedes another.  AEC credits a
   relation only when the trusted native verifier extracts the target
   evidence digest and relation from integrity-protected native bytes.
   An unbacked relation never satisfies a required binding.

   *Verifier and key-role confusion.* Native verifiers, revisions, trust
   anchors, mapping profiles, and human directories are relying-party
   pins.  They MUST NOT be accepted in the same transaction as
   presenter-controlled evidence.  A key trusted for one component role
   does not automatically satisfy another role.  An artifact signed by a
   key that is not pinned for its role can be VERIFIED; it is never
   ACCEPTED for that role.

   *Verification and acceptance.* If trust decisions are folded into
   VERIFIED, a forged or malformed artifact and an intact artifact from
   a signer the relying party does not trust produce the same result,
   and a replay record states more than the relying party's pins
   support.  Keeping the results separate lets a later reader who holds
   the evidence re-derive VERIFIED without adopting the original relying
   party's trust decisions, and keeps ACCEPTED attributable to
   identified trust snapshots.  Neither result alone makes a component
   eligible.

   *Freshness and status.* Message freshness, artifact age, credential
   validity, credential revocation, authority revocation, and policy
   revision are separate checks.  A current credential does not make old
   per-action evidence fresh.  A replay record captures the checked
   instant and snapshots; it does not establish current status later.




Schrock                   Expires 31 March 2027                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains       September 2026


   *Replay overclaiming.* Deterministic replay shows that the same
   normalized inputs produce the same evidence result.  It is not a
   refinement proof, a guarantee that a native verifier was correctly
   implemented, or proof that the recorded external status snapshot was
   honest.

   *Resource exhaustion.* Implementations MUST bound JSON depth, node
   count, component count, string bytes, expression tokens and depth,
   binding count, native verifier work, and diagnostic output.  Any
   bound exceeded is UNSATISFIED.

   *Host-language and transport boundaries.* Strict JSON parsing must
   reject duplicate member names before ordinary object construction can
   hide them.  AEC inherits the confidentiality and integrity properties
   of its transport.  The evidence and frozen action passed to later
   stages must not be mutable after evaluation.

   *Signature overclaiming.* A valid signature establishes only the
   signer and statement semantics of the selected native profile.  It
   does not inherently prove a natural person's identity, human
   operation, comprehension, legal authority, safety, execution, or
   outcome.

15.  Privacy Considerations

   An AEC bundle can reveal identities, organizational roles,
   destinations, resources, policy choices, and timing.  Presenters and
   relying parties SHOULD disclose and retain only evidence needed by
   the selected requirement.  A plain digest of low-entropy personal
   data is not anonymization.

   The replay record SHOULD contain normalized facts and content
   digests, not unnecessary raw evidence.  Even those facts can reveal
   relationships and decision timing.  Access, retention, and
   correlation controls remain deployment responsibilities.

16.  Relationship to Other Work

   CAID [CAID] owns typed material-action identity and exact, relying-
   party-pinned cross-format mapping.  AEC uses CAID only after native
   verification and acceptance and does not add trust semantics to a
   CAID.

   Authorization Receipts [EP-RECEIPTS] and Quorum [EP-QUORUM] define
   native human-authorization profiles.  AEC composes them without
   generalizing all evidence into those formats.





Schrock                   Expires 31 March 2027                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains       September 2026


   The earlier Action Evidence Graph draft (draft-schrock-ep-action-
   evidence-graph-00) described content-addressed graph references,
   relying-party evidence policy replay, a five-verdict classification,
   policy packs, and a signed reliance result.  This revision
   incorporates the useful composition substance into AEC: relying-
   party-owned evidence requirements, content-digested components, byte-
   backed relations, normalized facts, and a replay digest.  It
   intentionally does not adopt the EP-AEG-v1 graph envelope, five-
   verdict taxonomy, policy packs, or signed reliance-result format.

   Revision -04 superseded draft-schrock-ep-action-evidence-graph-00 for
   this evidence-composition and replay scope.  This revision preserves
   that consolidation.

   Agent Qualification Statements [EP-QUALIFICATION] can be verified as
   native components and can fill a relying-party-named qualification
   role.  Their observation and policy-satisfaction claims remain
   bounded by their native profile; qualification MUST NOT be converted
   into AUTHORIZED without the separate boundary decision and controls
   described by AEB.

17.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.  It creates no universal
   component, relation, verifier, action-mapping, requirement, reason-
   code, or policy registry.

18.  Changes in -07

   *  Separated VERIFIED from ACCEPTED.  In -06, VERIFIED meant that the
      native verifier accepted an artifact under pinned trust inputs,
      which merged the cryptographic result with the relying party's
      trust decision.  VERIFIED now means only that the artifact's
      cryptographic and structural checks passed.  ACCEPTED is a new,
      separate result: the relying party's pinned trust inputs accept a
      VERIFIED artifact.

   *  Native verifiers report both results, never ACCEPTED without
      VERIFIED, and report the artifact as not VERIFIED when a combined
      native procedure cannot attribute a failure.  A key resolved from
      relying-party key material makes an artifact checkable, not
      ACCEPTED.

   *  Mapping runs only after both results are positive, and eligibility
      requires both.  Each normalized fact and replay record carries
      them as separate native_verification and acceptance members, and
      the replay record binds trust-snapshot digests.




Schrock                   Expires 31 March 2027                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains       September 2026


   *  Defined UNSATISFIED explicitly as every result other than
      SATISFIED, including an evaluation that could not complete.

   *  Updated the implementation status and references.

19.  Changes in -06

   *  Added an explicit pre-execution Authorization Bundle component,
      kept separate from the terminal Trust Receipt component.

   *  Updated implementation status for the structured requirement,
      native facts, role constraints, required bindings, and replay
      contract.

   *  Updated references without changing the EP-AEC-v1 envelope or
      converting evidence satisfaction into execution authority.

20.  Changes in -05

   *  Added a closed distinct-subject-quorum role constraint that counts
      only native-verifier-derived subject identities.

   *  Made the boundary between evidence sufficiency and AEB authority
      constraints explicit: initiator exclusion, executor exclusion,
      one-time consumption, and execution remain outside AEC.

   *  Clarified that qualification statements can fill a named evidence
      role but never authorize an action by themselves.

   *  Updated implementation status and successor references without
      changing the EP-AEC-v1 component envelope.

21.  Implementation Status

   The Apache-2.0 JavaScript reference implementation provides
   createAuthorizationChainEvaluator for the structured EP-AEC-
   REQUIREMENT-v1 contract.  Configuration captures the relying party's
   requirement, native-verifier profiles, trust snapshots, and optional
   action mappings before evaluation.  The evaluator implements exact
   expected-action matching, native-derived subject constraints,
   required byte-backed bindings, required freshness and authenticated
   status checks, and EP-AEC-REPLAY-v1 records.  Replay re-verifies the
   original evidence under those configuration pins; serialized facts
   are not trusted merely because their digest matches.

   The evaluator revision that accompanies this document separates the
   two results.  Native verifier callbacks return separate verified and
   accepted results; every replay fact records native_verification and



Schrock                   Expires 31 March 2027                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains       September 2026


   acceptance; a callback result that reports ACCEPTED without VERIFIED,
   or that carries only the earlier combined validity flag, is refused.
   The built-in ep-quorum verifier checks integrity under the public
   keys a quorum carries.  The built-in ep-receipt, ep-authorization-
   bundle, and platform-attestation verifiers resolve keys from pinned
   material and report some key-directory failures that their native
   procedures detect inside the signature step as not VERIFIED, as
   Section 6 permits.

   The older string-requirement API remains a separate legacy interface.
   It does not implement the complete structured contract and keeps one
   combined validity flag per component.  The new evaluator also
   dispatches the explicit pre-execution ep-authorization-bundle
   component.  Evidence satisfaction neither authorizes execution nor
   reserves, consumes, or reconciles authority.

   The associated tests are same-team reference evidence, not an
   independent implementation, a proof of all native verifier profiles,
   or complete deployment mediation.  Custom native verifiers and
   mapping callbacks remain trusted configuration.  Input sizes and
   asynchronous verifier work are bounded; untrusted synchronous
   callback code requires separate process or worker isolation.

22.  References

22.1.  Normative References

   [BCP14]    Internet Engineering Task Force, "Key Words for Use in
              RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels", BCP 14, 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp14>.

   [CAID]     Schrock, I., "The Canonical Action Identifier (CAID)",
              Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-schrock-canonical-
              action-identifier-03, 26 September 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-schrock-canonical-
              action-identifier/>.

   [EP-QUORUM]
              Schrock, I., "Multi-Party Quorum Authorization for High-
              Risk Agent Actions (EP-QUORUM)", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-schrock-ep-quorum-04, 6 September
              2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-schrock-ep-
              quorum/>.








Schrock                   Expires 31 March 2027                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains       September 2026


   [EP-RECEIPTS]
              Schrock, I., "Authorization Receipts for High-Risk Agent
              Actions", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-schrock-
              ep-authorization-receipts-13, 11 September 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-schrock-ep-
              authorization-receipts/>.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC5234]  Crocker, D., Ed. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
              Specifications: ABNF", STD 68, RFC 5234,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5234, January 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5234>.

   [RFC7493]  Bray, T., Ed., "The I-JSON Message Format", RFC 7493,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7493, March 2015,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7493>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

   [RFC8785]  Rundgren, A., Jordan, B., and S. Erdtman, "JSON
              Canonicalization Scheme (JCS)", RFC 8785,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8785, June 2020,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8785>.

22.2.  Informative References

   [EP-AEB]   Schrock, I., "The Action Evidence Boundary for
              Consequential Agent Effects", Work in Progress, Internet-
              Draft, draft-schrock-action-evidence-boundary-07, 25
              September 2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-
              schrock-action-evidence-boundary/>.

   [EP-QUALIFICATION]
              Schrock, I., "Portable Agent Qualification Statements for
              Consequential Actions", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft,
              draft-schrock-agent-qualification-statements-00, 27 July
              2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-schrock-
              agent-qualification-statements/>.







Schrock                   Expires 31 March 2027                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains       September 2026


Acknowledgments

   Review of adjacent work sharpened the separation among native
   validity, cross-format action mapping, evidence satisfaction, local
   authorization, credential status, human operation, and effect truth.
   Acknowledgment does not imply endorsement.

Author's Address

   Iman Schrock
   EMILIA Protocol, Inc.
   United States of America
   Email: team@emiliaprotocol.ai






































Schrock                   Expires 31 March 2027                [Page 22]
