



Network Working Group                                         I. Schrock
Internet-Draft                                     EMILIA Protocol, Inc.
Intended status: Experimental                             10 August 2026
Expires: 11 February 2027


Bounded Capability Receipts and Durable Spend Control for Agent Actions
            draft-schrock-ep-bounded-capability-receipts-04

Abstract

   Agents sometimes need bounded authority to perform more than one
   consequential action without obtaining a new human approval for every
   operation.  A signed token alone cannot enforce a shared budget
   across replicas, survive retries safely, or distinguish an operation
   that never crossed an effect boundary from one whose outcome is
   unknown.

   This document defines a bounded capability receipt and a durable
   reserve-execute-commit protocol.  The receipt binds an issuance
   authorization, a closed action scope, a budget with explicit units, a
   holder proof, an expiry, and any parent capability.  The state
   protocol atomically refuses overspend and replay, fences concurrent
   owners, and charges an indeterminate operation when an external
   effect may have occurred.  Delegation transfers rather than copies
   authority: all direct child allocations are funded by committed
   parent operations before child registration, and their aggregate
   cannot exceed the parent balance within one authoritative atomic
   state domain.  It also defines narrowing-only delegation, explicit
   revocation inheritance for delegated authority, and evidence
   interfaces.  It does not make a bearer token into human approval,
   does not provide cross-domain or offline global double-spend
   prevention, and does not claim that an authorized action was safe,
   lawful, or successfully executed.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.







Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities             August 2026


   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 11 February 2027.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.1.  Requirements Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.2.  Scope and Non-Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  Trust Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4.  The Bounded Capability Receipt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     4.1.  Required Fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     4.2.  Signature Input and Receipt Digest  . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.3.  Receipt Verification  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   5.  Issuance Authorization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   6.  Per-Action Human Authorization Composition  . . . . . . . . .   9
   7.  Action Scope  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   8.  Holder Proof and Threshold Custody  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   9.  Registration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   10. Reserve, Execute, and Commit  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     10.1.  Reserve  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     10.2.  Effect Boundary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     10.3.  Commit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     10.4.  Crash Recovery and Reconciliation  . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   11. Executor and State-Domain Binding . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   12. Narrowing Delegation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
     12.1.  Revocation Inheritance Across Delegation Lineage . . . .  15
   13. Evidence and Decision Vocabulary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   14. Failure Codes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   15. Conformance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17



Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities             August 2026


   16. Relationship to Other Work  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   17. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
   18. Privacy Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
   19. Implementation Status . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   20. Changes Since -02 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
   21. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
   22. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
     22.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
     22.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  25
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  26

1.  Introduction

   A single-action authorization receipt is intentionally narrow: it
   records approval of one exact action and can be accepted at most once
   within its atomic consumption domain.  Some agent deployments also
   need a different primitive.  For example, an operator may authorize
   an agent to purchase a bounded class of supplies, subject to an
   aggregate monetary ceiling and an expiry, without asking a human to
   approve each conforming purchase.

   That primitive has two inseparable parts:

   1.  a signed capability receipt that states the immutable authority
       boundary; and

   2.  a shared, durable state machine that serializes reservations and
       committed consumption across retries, processes, replicas, and
       restarts.

   The signed object without the state machine is replayable budget
   metadata.  The state machine without a signed, scoped grant has no
   portable statement of authority.  This document specifies their
   composition.

1.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

   BCP 14 is indexed by the RFC Editor at [BCP14].







Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities             August 2026


1.2.  Scope and Non-Goals

   This document defines issuance binding, action-scope evaluation,
   budget accounting, holder proof, durable reservation and commitment,
   and narrowing delegation.  It does not define user authentication,
   human-approval presentation, general policy syntax, payment clearing,
   settlement, currency conversion, revocation distribution, or the
   external effect adapter.

   A capability receipt is machine authority evidence.  It is not,
   merely by being signed, evidence that a human reviewed each later
   action.  Deployments that require per-action human authorization
   continue to require a per-action authorization artifact.

   When a capability may be exercised by more than one executor, every
   executor MUST use the same relying-party-pinned authoritative atomic
   state domain.  A deployment that cannot enforce that binding MUST
   restrict the capability to one executor or state only a per-executor
   budget guarantee.

2.  Terminology

   Issuance authorization:  An independently verified authorization
      artifact for the exact act of creating a bounded capability.

   Capability receipt:  The signed immutable grant defined by this
      document.

   Capability issuer:  The principal whose pinned key signs a capability
      receipt.

   Holder proof:  Proof that the requester controls the secret or key
      named by the capability receipt.  Holder proof is not proof that a
      requested action is in scope.

   Scope verifier:  A verifier for a named scope profile, selected and
      configured by the relying party.

   Capability store:  The authoritative shared transactional state for
      registration, reservation, and committed consumption.

   State domain:  The relying-party-pinned atomic store and trust
      configuration to which every authority-bearing participant for a
      capability lineage is bound.  A state-domain identifier is
      deployment context, not portable proof of global uniqueness.

   Operation ID:  A globally unique identifier for one attempted
      capability-funded operation within a capability-store domain.



Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities             August 2026


   Reservation token:  An unguessable owner-fencing value returned by a
      successful reservation and required for its commitment.

   Effect boundary:  The point after which an external effect may have
      occurred and therefore budget cannot safely be restored merely
      because the caller did not receive a successful response.

   Indeterminate outcome:  An operation for which the executor cannot
      prove that no effect occurred and cannot prove a successful
      expected effect.

3.  Trust Model

   The relying party selects capability-issuer keys, accepted issuance
   authorization profiles, scope profiles, state-store domain, and local
   authorization policy.  A key embedded in a presented capability
   receipt MUST NOT, by itself, become a trust anchor.  An empty trust
   configuration MUST fail closed.

   The capability store is trusted to serialize state transitions and
   retain committed operation records.  The effect adapter is trusted to
   place the effect boundary correctly and to report outcomes honestly.
   This protocol makes those trust dependencies explicit; it does not
   remove them.

   All capability-store participants that can authorize a capability or
   allocate, register, reserve, commit, reconcile, suspend, revoke, or
   report any ancestor or descendant drawing on that capability's
   authority MUST use one shared authoritative atomic state domain.
   Independent stores cannot prevent each other from accepting or
   reallocating the same remaining authority.  Conservation claims in
   this document apply only inside that one domain.

   A deployment may have multiple executor instances, settlement
   adapters, or process replicas.  If they can exercise the same
   capability, each MUST resolve the same state domain before admission
   and use that domain for the budget transition.  An executor's local
   record of prior spending is not an authoritative aggregate record.
   If the deployment cannot make the shared-domain guarantee, it MUST
   either name exactly one executor in the applicable scope or describe
   the limit as per-executor and MUST NOT claim aggregate conservation
   across executors.

4.  The Bounded Capability Receipt

   The receipt is a JSON object serialized using the JSON
   Canonicalization Scheme (JCS) [RFC8785] before signing.  The
   following is illustrative:



Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities             August 2026


   {
     "@version": "EP-BOUNDED-CAPABILITY-v1",
     "capability": {
       "capability_id": "cap_01J...",
       "issuer": "https://operator.example",
       "subject": "agent:procurement-7",
       "authorization": {
         "receipt_id": "rcpt_01J...",
         "receipt_digest": "sha256:4c..."
       },
       "scope": {
         "profile": "urn:emilia:scope:caid-set-v1",
         "value": {
           "caids": ["caid1:sha256:..."]
         },
         "digest": "sha256:8a..."
       },
       "budget": {
         "amount": 250000,
         "unit": "iso4217:USD",
         "scale": 2
       },
       "holder": {
         "method": "sha-256-preimage",
         "commitment": "sha256:91..."
       },
       "threshold": {"m": 2, "n": 3},
       "revocation_mode": "cascade",
       "parent": null,
       "not_before": "2026-07-18T20:00:00Z",
       "expires_at": "2026-07-19T20:00:00Z"
     },
     "capability_signature": {
       "algorithm": "Ed25519",
       "public_key": "base64url...",
       "value": "base64url..."
     }
   }

4.1.  Required Fields

   @version:  EP-BOUNDED-CAPABILITY-v1.

   capability_id:  A globally unique, opaque identifier.  Uniqueness is
      not used as a substitute for cryptographic binding.

   issuer:  The issuer identifier used to select a relying-party-pinned
      verification key.



Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities             August 2026


   subject:  The intended holder or workload identifier.  This
      identifier does not replace holder proof or live workload
      authentication.

   authorization:  The identifier and SHA-256 digest of the complete
      issuance authorization artifact.  The digest MUST cover the exact
      bytes accepted by that artifact's native verifier.

   scope:  A named scope profile, its value, and the SHA-256 digest of
      the JCS serialization of profile and value.

   budget:  A non-negative integer amount no greater than
      9007199254740991, an explicit unit, and a decimal scale from 0
      through 18.  For iso4217:USD with scale 2, an amount of 250000
      denotes USD 2500.00.  Implementations MUST NOT infer a scale from
      display conventions.

   holder:  A recognized holder-proof method and commitment.

   threshold:  Integers m and n satisfying 1 <= m <= n <= 255.  This
      field describes custody of the holder credential; it does not
      assert approval by distinct humans.

   revocation_mode:  Exactly direct or cascade.  A direct revocation
      affects the named capability but does not withdraw authority
      already transferred to a registered child.  A cascade revocation
      also blocks new authority claims by every descendant.  The value
      is signed and MUST NOT be inferred from the issuer, holder,
      lineage depth, or a presenter-selected default.  A missing or
      unknown value MUST be rejected.

   parent:  null for a root capability.  For a child capability, an
      object containing the parent capability ID, the digest of the
      complete signed parent receipt, and the identifier of an
      authenticated parent delegation operation.  That operation MUST
      bind the child receipt digest and the delegated amount, unit,
      scale, scope, validity interval, and revocation mode.  A parent
      identifier without digest-bound parent and delegation evidence is
      insufficient.

   not_before and expires_at:  UTC timestamps in Internet Date/Time
      format [RFC3339] using the canonical string form selected by the
      deployment profile.  Expiry is exclusive.  Numeric epochs,
      implementation-specific date strings, and values that do not
      round-trip to the canonical form MUST be rejected.






Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities             August 2026


4.2.  Signature Input and Receipt Digest

   The issuer signature input is the JCS serialization of the object
   containing exactly @version and capability.  The signature algorithm
   for this version is Ed25519 [RFC8032].  The receipt digest is:

   SHA-256(JCS({
     "@version": receipt["@version"],
     "capability": receipt.capability,
     "capability_signature": receipt.capability_signature
   }))

   The issuance authorization is bound by both its identifier and
   digest.  Binding only a caller-selected receipt identifier is
   insufficient because two different artifacts can carry the same
   identifier.

4.3.  Receipt Verification

   A verifier MUST perform all of the following and fail closed on any
   error:

   1.  apply bounded parsing and reject duplicate JSON member names,
       unknown critical versions, malformed encodings, and out-of-range
       values;

   2.  select the issuer key from relying-party configuration, not from
       the presented object alone;

   3.  verify the issuer signature over the exact signature input;

   4.  natively verify the issuance authorization under its own pinned
       trust inputs and compare both receipt identifier and digest;

   5.  verify that the authorized action is issuance of this exact
       capability object, or of a digest that commits to it;

   6.  verify the scope digest and require a recognized, relying-party-
       enabled scope profile;












Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities             August 2026


   7.  verify the validity interval and, for a child, resolve and verify
       the digest-bound parent lineage to a root capability or a locally
       trusted, previously validated lineage checkpoint.  Reject an
       unresolved, truncated, reordered, or substituted link; a repeated
       capability ID or receipt digest; the leaf appearing among its
       ancestors; or a path exceeding deployment policy.  At every hop,
       verify that the child amount does not exceed the authenticated
       delegated amount, unit and scale are unchanged, validity is
       contained by the parent, and scope is no broader than the parent
       scope; and

   8.  compute the capability receipt digest used for store
       registration.

   Receipt verification returns VERIFIED.  It does not return
   AUTHORIZED, prove remaining budget, or prove that a proposed
   operation is in scope.

5.  Issuance Authorization

   The issuance authorization MUST authorize the act of creating the
   capability, including the immutable digest of its subject, scope,
   budget, holder commitment, revocation mode, parent, and validity
   interval.  It MUST NOT be reused as though it were a per-operation
   authorization for later spends.

   When the issuance artifact is an EMILIA Authorization Receipt, its
   exact action is capability issuance and its one-time consumption
   occurs when the capability is registered.  Later capability-funded
   operations are governed by this document's scope and durable state
   protocol.

6.  Per-Action Human Authorization Composition

   A deployment may require a separately authenticated human
   authorization for an individual capability-funded exercise.  That
   artifact MUST bind the exact canonical exercise-action digest used by
   reservation and effect admission.  If material terms are not
   committed by that digest, the artifact MUST bind those terms
   independently.

   A capability signature, holder proof, threshold custody, or key
   protected inside a workload is not evidence that a human reviewed the
   later exercise.  The capability verifier and human-authorization
   verifier may remain separate.  A relying-party composition policy may
   require both results for the same action digest, but the two
   verifiers MUST NOT treat the other's evidence as a trust anchor.




Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities             August 2026


   This composition does not make human authorization part of every
   bounded capability.  A deployment that permits conforming exercises
   without a per-action human artifact MUST state that the issuance
   authorization established the bounded class rather than a human
   reviewing each later action.

7.  Action Scope

   Before reserving budget, the enforcement point MUST compute the
   proposed material action independently of presenter-supplied labels
   and invoke the pinned verifier for scope.profile.  A missing profile,
   unknown action representation, lossy mapping, or indeterminate
   comparison MUST refuse.

   The mandatory-to-implement urn:emilia:scope:caid-set-v1 profile
   contains a non-empty, duplicate-free array of Canonical Action
   IDentifiers.  It matches only exact identifier equality.  For
   delegation, a child CAID set is no broader than its parent only when
   every child identifier is an exact member of the parent set.
   Equality of the complete sets is allowed.  This non-strict subset
   relation is reflexive and transitive.  Possession of a CAID
   authorizes nothing outside this verified capability context.

   Application profiles can define closed constraints over typed action
   fields.  Such a profile MUST specify canonicalization, exact value
   equality, comparison, unknown-field handling, numerical units, and an
   algorithm for deciding whether a delegated scope is no broader than
   its parent.  The profile MUST state whether that attenuation relation
   is reflexive and whether it is transitive.  It MUST classify the
   basis for any transitivity claim as one of: definition-derived,
   mechanically-checkable, or asserted.  A mechanically checkable claim
   MUST define a finite domain and deterministic procedure by which a
   verifier or conformance suite can enumerate the required triples.  An
   asserted claim is profile-author testimony, not a demonstrated
   algebraic property.

   A verifier MUST NOT promote per-hop comparisons into a chain-wide
   non-widening claim unless transitivity is either derived from the
   relation definition or mechanically established over the profile's
   complete declared finite domain.  A comparison under a non-
   transitive, asserted-transitive, or unknown-transitivity relation is
   local to the reported hop.  It can be useful evidence, but it does
   not compose by induction across a delegation chain.

   Scope comparison is evaluated per component and relative to the
   verifier that produced it.  A comparison report MUST record each
   component, the deciding verifier, the pinned profile and rule, the
   values compared, the local result, whether the relation is reflexive,



Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities             August 2026


   the transitivity classification and basis, and whether the result is
   local-only or chain-composable.  An undecided result MUST distinguish
   a component for which no order is defined from one whose governing
   profile was unavailable to that verifier.  Mandatory-profile
   components MUST be reported rather than assumed.  A structural chain
   result and a scope comparison result MUST NOT be combined into an
   overall validity claim unless both reports, including their
   decidability and composition limits, travel with the claim.

   Profiles that intentionally use a non-reflexive relation MUST state
   that an unchanged scope will be refused.  Profiles that cannot decide
   either action membership or attenuation MUST return INDETERMINATE.

8.  Holder Proof and Threshold Custody

   The mandatory-to-implement holder method is sha-256-preimage.  The
   holder presents exactly 32 bytes over a confidential, integrity-
   protected channel, and the enforcement point compares SHA-
   256(preimage) with the signed commitment using a constant-time
   comparison.  The preimage MUST NOT be logged, stored with the
   receipt, or included in portable evidence.

   The preimage may be divided using a threshold secret-sharing scheme
   before presentation.  Share format, participant authentication,
   confidentiality, recovery, and distribution are outside this
   document.  Reconstructing m shares proves control of the holder
   secret; it does not prove that m distinct humans reviewed or approved
   the action.  Human multi-party approval requires a protocol such as
   [EP-QUORUM].

9.  Registration

   After receipt verification and one-time consumption of the issuance
   authorization, the issuer registers the capability in the
   authoritative store.  Registration MUST atomically create immutable
   fields for capability ID, receipt digest, unit, scale, total budget,
   scope digest, validity interval, revocation mode, and parent.  It
   MUST initialize consumed and reserved to zero.

   A second registration of the same capability ID MUST succeed only
   when every immutable field and receipt digest is identical.  Any
   mismatch is a collision and MUST refuse.

   Mutable counters in a presented receipt are not authoritative.
   Remaining budget is computed only from the shared store:

   remaining = total - consumed - reserved




Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities             August 2026


   The authoritative state MUST maintain the invariant reserved +
   consumed <= total for every capability.  For a parent capability,
   each registered child allocation MUST be covered by one or more
   distinct terminal delegated operation committed against that parent
   before child registration.  The aggregate amount of registered direct
   children MUST NOT exceed the amount committed by those distinct
   parent delegation operations, and each operation identifier MUST NOT
   fund more than one child receipt digest.

10.  Reserve, Execute, and Commit

10.1.  Reserve

   A reservation request contains the capability ID, capability receipt
   digest, globally unique operation ID, the immutable canonical
   exercise-action digest and CAID where used, positive integer amount,
   unit, scale, and authenticated holder proof.  The same immutable
   action snapshot MUST be used for scope evaluation, authorization,
   reservation accounting, and the effect callback; a mutable caller
   object MUST NOT cross those boundaries.  In one serializable
   transaction, or while holding an equivalent row lock, the store MUST:

   1.  load the registered capability and compare the receipt digest;

   2.  resolve the complete authority-bearing ancestor lineage in the
       same authoritative state domain and reject unavailable,
       inconsistent, or truncated state;

   3.  reject an unknown, not-yet-valid, expired, or revoked capability;

   4.  reject when any revoked ancestor has revocation_mode equal to
       cascade;

   5.  reject a unit or scale mismatch;

   6.  reject any already-seen operation ID, regardless of its previous
       capability or outcome;

   7.  verify that the amount is positive and no greater than total -
       consumed - reserved;

   8.  increase reserved by the amount; and

   9.  create an operation in state reserved with an unguessable
       reservation token, exercise-action digest, and amount, and return
       that token only to the owner.





Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities             August 2026


   Scope evaluation and local authorization policy MUST succeed before
   the effect adapter is entered.  Deployments SHOULD perform them
   before reserving to reduce abandoned reservations.

10.2.  Effect Boundary

   The enforcement point enters the effect adapter only after a
   successful reservation.  It MUST NOT expose an alternate path to the
   same effect that bypasses capability enforcement when the action
   requires this profile.

10.3.  Commit

   A commit request contains the operation ID, reservation token, and
   one of three outcomes: executed, indeterminate, or delegated.  In one
   atomic transaction, the store MUST verify ownership and reserved
   state, decrease reserved, increase consumed by the same amount, and
   make the operation terminal.

   A repeated commit, wrong reservation token, or commit against a non-
   reserved operation MUST refuse.  A caller timeout does not justify
   retrying with a new operation ID; the caller MUST query the original
   operation or reconcile it.

   If the executor cannot prove that the effect boundary was not
   crossed, it MUST commit indeterminate and charge the budget.
   Availability loss is safer than allowing the same authority to be
   spent again after an unobserved external effect.

10.4.  Crash Recovery and Reconciliation

   Reservations survive process and replica failure.  A deployment MUST
   define a reconciler for non-terminal operations.  The reconciler may
   commit executed only with authenticated effect evidence.  It may
   restore budget only when it can prove the effect boundary was never
   crossed.  In every other case it MUST commit indeterminate.

11.  Executor and State-Domain Binding

   The state domain is a relying-party trust input.  A portable
   capability receipt need not embed a globally meaningful domain
   identifier, but the registration and operation records SHOULD
   identify the domain and executor participant used for each admission
   so that a relying party can detect an unsupported state fork.

   When multiple executors are authorized to present one capability, the
   store MUST serialize their reservations and commitments in one
   domain.  Merely replicating a signed receipt, copying a remaining



Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities             August 2026


   counter, or exchanging eventual spending logs does not satisfy this
   requirement.  A deployment that uses independent stores may still use
   signed receipts, but it MUST NOT describe the resulting behavior as
   one aggregate budget.

   A scope that names one executor is a valid narrower deployment
   choice.  The applicable scope profile MUST define how that executor
   participant is identified and compared at admission.  This removes
   the cross-executor guarantee requirement; it does not turn a local
   record into a global budget or provide offline double-spend
   prevention.

12.  Narrowing Delegation

   A child capability MUST NOT outlive its parent, exceed the
   authenticated amount delegated from the parent, change unit or scale,
   or broaden the parent's scope.  Its delegation chain MUST be bounded
   by deployment policy and MUST include the parent receipt digest.

   Before registering a child, the verifier MUST validate complete
   digest-linked ancestry to a trusted root within the configured depth
   bound, or enforce equivalent authenticated parent-edge constraints in
   one authoritative store.  The verified lineage MUST form a simple
   path.  The verifier MUST reject a repeated capability identifier or
   receipt digest, a missing or inconsistent parent, a substituted or
   reordered edge, or a chain whose trusted root cannot be established.
   A cycle, truncated lineage, or over-depth chain MUST fail closed.
   Per-receipt identifier uniqueness or a self-declared list of
   ancestors does not establish graph-wide acyclicity.  An
   implementation MUST NOT infer acyclicity merely because its ordinary
   issuance path constructs children from known parents; verification
   applies the same check to imported and reconstructed chains.

   Creating a child is itself a parent-funded operation.  Before
   registering the child, the issuer MUST reserve the delegated amount
   from the parent and MUST commit that exact reservation once with
   outcome delegated.  The authenticated terminal operation record MUST
   bind the exact child receipt digest, delegated amount, unit, scale,
   scope, validity interval, and revocation mode before the child is
   registered; otherwise a valid parent spend could be paired with a
   different child.  A shared store SHOULD perform parent commitment and
   child registration atomically.  If that is impossible and child
   registration fails after the parent is committed, the parent budget
   remains consumed and the orphaned delegation MUST be retained for
   reconciliation.  The system MUST NOT silently refund it.






Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities             August 2026


12.1.  Revocation Inheritance Across Delegation Lineage

   Delegation transfers bounded authority rather than leaving every
   child as a live reference to its parent.  Direct revocation of an
   ancestor therefore does not, by itself, determine whether authority
   already transferred to registered descendants survives.  The signed
   revocation_mode field makes that choice explicit.

   When a capability's revocation_mode is direct, revoking that
   capability MUST prevent new reservations and child allocations funded
   by that capability.  It MUST NOT, solely because of that revocation,
   invalidate a child registered before the revocation committed.  The
   child remains subject to its own validity, scope, budget, direct
   revocation, and any cascade-mode ancestor.

   When a capability's revocation_mode is cascade, revoking that
   capability MUST prevent every descendant from making a new
   reservation or funding a new child.  The enforcement point MUST
   establish the current revocation state of every authority-bearing
   cascade-mode ancestor in the same authoritative atomic state domain
   used for the descendant reservation.  A cached status value or
   eventually consistent notification does not establish immediate
   cascade revocation.

   The ancestor revocation transition and a descendant reservation MUST
   be serialized in that state domain.  If revocation commits first, the
   descendant request MUST refuse.  If the reservation commits first,
   the revocation is late for that operation and prevents later
   authority claims; it MUST NOT retroactively release the reservation,
   relabel an effect, or authorize a retry.  Any operation whose effect
   outcome is unresolved remains subject to the reconciliation rules in
   Section 10.4.

   If complete current ancestor state cannot be established before
   reservation, the request MUST refuse without entering the effect
   adapter.  This is a pre-effect status failure, not evidence that an
   external effect is indeterminate.  A deployment using separate state
   domains or freshness-bounded status distribution MUST NOT claim
   immediate cascade revocation across those domains.

   Neither mode grants a grace period after revocation.  Continued or
   wind-down authority MUST be established by a separate authorization
   with its own exact scope, budget, holder, and validity interval; it
   MUST NOT be inferred from an in-flight delegation.  This document
   defines the consequence of an authenticated revocation within one
   state domain.  It does not define who is entitled to revoke, how
   revocation is distributed, or how independently operated domains
   transfer exclusive admission ownership.



Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities             August 2026


13.  Evidence and Decision Vocabulary

   A capability receipt can be VERIFIED.  A scope verifier can return
   the profile-local result IN_SCOPE, OUT_OF_SCOPE, or INDETERMINATE.
   This containment result is not the architecture's MATCH state, which
   is reserved for correlation of exact material actions.  A relying-
   party evidence requirement can be SATISFIED.  Successful local policy
   and an atomic reservation together can establish AUTHORIZED for one
   exercise.  Separately authenticated effect evidence can establish
   EXECUTED.  No earlier state implies a later one.

   Portable evidence for a capability-funded operation SHOULD include
   the capability receipt digest, issuance authorization digest, scope
   profile and digest, operation ID, the exact exercise action digest
   and CAID where used, amount, unit, scale, reservation timestamp,
   terminal outcome, and any authenticated effect statement.  The
   integrity-protected operation record MUST bind the exercise action
   and the capability receipt digest.  Holder secrets and reservation
   tokens MUST NOT be included.

   An Authorization Evidence Chain may carry that operation record as a
   native component whose verifier recursively verifies the capability
   receipt, issuance authorization, scope result, and operation-record
   integrity.  The static grant is not a same-action component for every
   later exercise.  Evidence satisfaction does not query or reserve
   current budget; that state transition remains at the enforcement
   point.

14.  Failure Codes

   Implementations SHOULD expose stable, non-authorizing failure codes
   including:

   *  capability_untrusted_issuer

   *  capability_authorization_mismatch

   *  capability_scope_mismatch

   *  capability_scope_indeterminate

   *  capability_holder_proof_invalid

   *  capability_not_active

   *  capability_expired

   *  capability_revoked



Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities             August 2026


   *  capability_revocation_mode_invalid

   *  capability_ancestor_revoked

   *  capability_ancestor_status_unavailable

   *  capability_budget_exceeded

   *  capability_delegation_lineage_invalid

   *  capability_delegation_not_narrowed

   *  capability_operation_replay

   *  capability_reservation_owner_mismatch

   *  capability_commit_indeterminate

   A failure code is diagnostic output, not an authorization artifact.
   Responses SHOULD avoid revealing secret, budget, or scope details to
   an unauthenticated caller.

15.  Conformance

   A conforming implementation MUST pass positive and adversarial
   vectors for receipt canonicalization and signature, authorization-
   digest substitution, untrusted issuer, unknown scope profile, action
   mismatch, holder-proof failure, duplicate registration, concurrent
   overspend, operation replay, wrong reservation token, double commit,
   expiry, a cycle spread across separately signed receipts, repeated
   ancestors, leaf-as-ancestor, missing or truncated lineage, reordered
   or substituted parent links, parent-receipt and delegation-operation
   substitution, a single-hop child exceeding the authenticated
   delegated amount, unit or scale changes, scope or validity widening
   at every hop, over-depth chains, parent over-allocation, crash
   recovery, and indeterminate-effect charging.

   The conformance set MUST exercise revocation inheritance over a root,
   child, and grandchild.  It MUST show that direct-mode revocation
   leaves previously registered descendant authority independently
   usable, while cascade-mode revocation refuses every later descendant
   reservation and child allocation.  It MUST reject a missing or
   unknown revocation_mode, refuse when required ancestor state is
   unavailable, and cover a race between ancestor revocation and
   descendant reservation in which exactly one transition commits first.
   A reservation that commits first remains owned and reconcilable; a
   revocation that commits first prevents the reservation.




Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities             August 2026


   The conformance set MUST also include multiple executor participants
   sharing one domain, an independent-store state fork, and a scope
   restricted to one executor; only the shared-domain case may claim one
   aggregate budget.

   The scope-profile conformance set MUST show exact CAID equality and
   non-strict subset attenuation, including unchanged parent and child
   sets.  For a profile whose relation is mechanically checkable, it
   MUST enumerate the complete declared finite domain and test
   reflexivity and transitivity.  It MUST also include a relation that
   passes every adjacent hop but fails transitivity, and demonstrate
   that the verifier labels those hop results local-only and refuses to
   claim chain-wide non-widening.  An asserted-transitive profile MUST
   NOT be reported as demonstrably transitive.

   The parent-over-allocation case MUST include at least three sibling
   child-creation attempts whose individually valid amounts collectively
   exceed the parent's available balance, with concurrent reservation
   ordering chosen by the implementation.  At most a balance-preserving
   subset may commit.  The case MUST also cover one operation identifier
   presented for two different child receipt digests and an orphaned
   child-registration failure after parent commitment.  The former
   refuses as operation replay; the latter leaves the committed parent
   amount consumed pending reconciliation.

   A wire-format implementation that does not implement one shared
   atomic store is a receipt verifier, not a conforming spend-control
   implementation.  A store implementation that accepts a capability
   without pinned issuer verification, issuance authorization, and scope
   matching is not conforming.

16.  Relationship to Other Work

   Rich Authorization Requests [RFC9396] carries fine-grained
   authorization details but deliberately leaves comparison semantics
   for arbitrary detail types to their specifications.  This document
   defines an executor-side durable spend state machine and requires a
   named closed scope profile.

   OAuth Transaction Tokens [TXN-TOKENS] propagate transaction-specific
   authorization context through a call chain.  Bounded Capability
   Receipts instead address an aggregate budget shared across multiple
   operations and the reserve/commit boundary at the executor.  A
   deployment can use both.







Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities             August 2026


   The Delegation Receipt Protocol for AI Agent Authorization [DRP]
   records delegation and narrowing.  This document requires narrowing
   for child capabilities and additionally accounts delegated budget as
   a terminal parent spend.

   Attenuating Authorization Tokens for Agentic Delegation Chains
   [ATTENUATING] describes constrained, attenuable agent tokens.  This
   document's distinct contribution is not the existence of constrained
   tokens; it is the composition of a signed grant with shared
   reservation ownership, committed budget accounting, and conservative
   treatment of indeterminate external effects.

   The Agent Identity Protocol [AIP] defines per-token budget ceilings
   and explicitly assigns cumulative spending enforcement to the
   orchestration runtime.  A bounded capability budget is instead a
   balance-valued authority in one authoritative store: reservation and
   consumption reduce the amount available to every sibling allocation
   in that domain.

   PEDIGREE [PEDIGREE] defines cryptographic delegation, mandate
   narrowing, and an operator-controlled ceiling.  This document
   preserves that identity and policy role and addresses the adjacent
   runtime question of how one parent balance funds multiple children
   without multiplying aggregate authority.

   The Credential Broker for Agents [CB4A] defines proxy and short-
   lived-token delivery patterns that keep long-lived provider
   credentials away from agents.  A deployment can use such a broker as
   the credential-owning effect adapter after this protocol grants one
   valid reservation; this document does not duplicate credential
   brokering.

   Condition-Bounded Credentials [CBC] binds workload-key use to live,
   verifier-appraised conditions.  That property composes with holder
   proof and provider entry, especially for stable attestable workloads.
   It does not replace aggregate balance accounting, and this document
   does not extend its hardware assumptions to hardware-less or cross-
   domain swarms.

   The affine Token Budgets work [TOKEN-BUDGETS] studies LLM cost
   overruns and uses Rust ownership to prevent cloning and use-after-
   delegation in one process.  It is adjacent prior art.  This document
   instead binds human- or policy-authorized consequential authority,
   exact exercise actions, durable provider-entry reservations, and
   conservative post-entry uncertainty across a transactional runtime.
   It does not claim that balance-valued budgets or affine ownership
   were invented here.




Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 19]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities             August 2026


   The Attested Payment Authorization for Autonomous Agents [HAWKINS]
   binds an attested payment key and endorsed software identity to a
   payment authorization scope and requires verification before
   settlement.  It is adjacent and complementary work: this document
   does not define hardware attestation or transparency registration,
   while that document does not define shared-domain aggregate
   conservation, durable reserve-execute-commit, parent-funded narrowing
   delegation, or indeterminate-effect charging.  A deployment can
   compose the two by binding their decisions to the same exact
   exercise-action digest without making either verifier consume the
   other's evidence as a trust anchor.

17.  Security Considerations

   *Identifier substitution.* Capability signatures bind the full
   issuance authorization digest, not only an identifier.  Scope, budget
   units, parent, holder commitment, and validity are all inside the
   issuer signature.

   *State forks.* Two stores accepting the same capability lineage can
   each spend or delegate its full budget.  Global offline or cross-
   domain double-spend prevention is therefore not provided.
   Deployments that cannot name one authoritative atomic state domain
   for a capability and every authority-bearing ancestor and descendant
   MUST NOT claim aggregate sibling conservation or an enforced
   aggregate budget.

   *Executor federation.* A multi-rail or multi-process deployment does
   not, by itself, establish a shared budget.  Every executor that can
   admit an exercise must be bound to the same state domain, or the
   scope must be restricted to one executor and the claim must be stated
   as per-executor.  Eventual reconciliation after independent
   admissions cannot retroactively prevent overspend.

   *Crash ambiguity.* Restoring budget after a timeout can authorize
   duplicate external effects.  Once the effect boundary may have been
   crossed, uncertainty is charged as indeterminate.

   *Bearer and share theft.* A raw holder secret or enough
   unauthenticated shares can authorize possession.  Secret shares
   require confidential distribution, authenticated participants,
   compromise response, and rate limiting.  Threshold custody is not
   human quorum.

   *Revocation.* Expiry and exhausted budget are not revocation.  A
   deployment that requires early invalidation MUST consult a separately
   authenticated revocation or status source before reservation and
   define its freshness policy.  Revocation inheritance is not inferred



Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 20]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities             August 2026


   from lineage alone: the signed mode determines whether already
   transferred descendant authority survives.  An immediate cascade
   claim requires the ancestor revocation transition and descendant
   reservation to be serialized in the same authoritative atomic state
   domain.  Notification or eventual cache refresh cannot supply that
   guarantee.

   *Units and arithmetic.* All accounting uses integers with signed unit
   and scale.  Floating-point arithmetic, implicit currency conversion,
   and caller-selected rounding MUST NOT occur in the authoritative
   budget path.

   *Database authority.* The capability tables contain authorization
   state.  Deployments MUST restrict writes to the enforcement service,
   use least-privilege credentials, protect backups, and audit
   administrative changes.

   *Delegation lineage.* Local uniqueness checks over one presented
   receipt do not establish graph-wide acyclicity or complete ancestry.
   Separately presented receipts can omit links, substitute a parent
   operation, or form a cycle unless each parent edge is authenticated
   and resolved by digest, or an authoritative store enforces equivalent
   edge constraints.  Implementations MUST fail closed on incomplete,
   cyclic, substituted, or non-narrowing lineage.  Verifiers apply the
   complete traversal and refusal rules in Section 12 to imported chains
   and chains reconstructed from storage.

   *Semantic limits.* A valid capability does not prove that an action
   is safe, lawful, beneficial, or correctly executed.  Local policy and
   domain controls remain necessary.

   *Cryptographic scope.* This version uses SHA-256 and Ed25519.  It
   does not provide a post-quantum signature profile or a zero-knowledge
   receipt.  Algorithm agility and long-term preservation are separate
   concerns.

18.  Privacy Considerations

   Capability receipts and operation records can reveal spending limits,
   organizational roles, intended action classes, counterparties, and
   timing.  Profiles SHOULD minimize identifiers, separate portable
   evidence from operational secrets, and define retention and access
   controls.  Hashing a low-entropy scope or identifier does not make it
   confidential.







Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 21]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities             August 2026


19.  Implementation Status

   The Apache-2.0 TypeScript reference implementation includes a signed
   pre-standard capability envelope, holder-secret commitment, optional
   threshold secret reconstruction, and a durable PostgreSQL reservation
   and commitment store.  Its issuer-controlled delegation API, when
   used with one shared capability store, reserves and commits a child
   amount from the immediate parent before registering the child.  The
   store has adversarial tests for overspend, replay, ownership fencing,
   expiry, terminal commitment, concurrent N-sibling aggregate over-
   allocation, one operation identifier paired with different child
   digests, orphaned registration after parent commitment, and an
   explicit two-store state-fork counterexample.  These are same-team
   implementation and regression results, not independent implementation
   or production deployment evidence.

   The prototype wire format predates this document and does not yet
   implement all mandatory fields in this version, including full
   issuance authorization digest binding, an explicit action-scope
   profile, and explicit budget unit scale, digest-linked parent
   lineage, authenticated parent-delegation binding, not_before, and
   complete ingest-time cycle validation.  It is therefore
   implementation experience, not a claim of conformance.  There is no
   independent implementation, interoperability event, production
   transaction history, post-quantum profile, or zero-knowledge
   implementation.  The executor-domain participant binding and per-
   action human-authorization composition added in -02 are protocol
   requirements and composition rules.  The reference execution path now
   implements those two integrations: an aggregate budget claim requires
   an exact match to a relying-party-pinned atomic state-domain digest;
   a mismatch may fall back only to an explicitly pinned single
   executor; and a required per-action human authorization must pass a
   native verifier under relying-party pins and bind the exact exercise-
   action digest.  Calls without an executor-domain binding are labeled
   local_store_only and do not claim aggregate enforcement.  A
   configured state-domain digest is a deployment trust binding; the
   code cannot by itself prove that two processes connect to the same
   physical database.

   The reference implementation now signs and requires revocation_mode,
   records each capability's immediate parent, and implements direct and
   cascade revocation in both the in-memory test store and PostgreSQL
   store.  A descendant reservation resolves the complete registered
   ancestor lineage.  The PostgreSQL path locks those state rows in the
   reservation transaction, so an ancestor revocation that commits first
   refuses the reservation, while a reservation that commits first
   remains owned and reconcilable.  Missing, malformed, or migration-
   incomplete ancestor state refuses before provider entry.  The tracked



Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 22]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities             August 2026


   migration quarantines legacy rows without an explicit mode rather
   than inferring direct or cascade.  Regression cases cover the signed
   closed field, direct descendant survival, cascade refusal,
   unavailable ancestor state, child allocation after revocation, and
   both orderings of the revocation race.  This is same-team
   implementation evidence inside one authoritative atomic state domain;
   it is not independent interoperability, revocation distribution, or
   cross-domain cascade enforcement.

   The -04 scope-profile contract and comparison-reporting rules are not
   yet implemented.  In particular, the reference implementation does
   not yet emit per-component decidability records, relation
   reflexivity, transitivity classification or basis, or the local-only
   versus chain-composable result.  No implementation or conformance
   claim is made for those additions.

   The reference implementation does reject repeated delegation
   identifiers, repeated parent capability identifiers, a leaf named as
   its own parent, and increasing amounts within the delegation chain
   presented at mint or verification time.  Those checks provide local
   simple-path and monotonic amount enforcement.  They do not discover
   omitted parents or establish the digest-linked, graph-wide lineage
   required by Section 12, so they do not close the remaining
   conformance gap.

   The public repository contains two CI-gated bounded TLA+ models
   relevant here.  The capability-accounting model covers registration,
   reservation, commitment, delegation, replay refusal, parent-funded
   child registration, and aggregate sibling conservation.  A separate
   -03 revocation-inheritance model covers every direct/cascade
   assignment over a root, child, and grandchild; complete ancestor-
   state availability; future child allocation; and both serialized
   orderings of revocation and reservation.  Exact state and obligation
   counts are emitted by governed proof-status artifacts.  These are
   bounded results about the models, not refinement proofs of the
   TypeScript, SQL, transaction adapter, cryptography, lineage
   verification, or complete protocol defined here.  Arbitrary
   implementation inputs still require the runtime traversal and refusal
   rules in Section 12.

   The main branch also runs a fixed-seed adversarial harness in per-
   push CI over the actual JavaScript in-memory capability and
   consumption stores.  It includes a true-concurrency Promise.all race
   target and a deliberately non-atomic comparison store that
   demonstrates the race detector can expose over-commitment.
   Additional targets exercise accounting and ownership invariants at
   whole-method boundaries.  This is regression evidence for those in-
   process stores, not complete protocol conformance: it does not fuzz



Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 23]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities             August 2026


   the PostgreSQL capability transaction path, the atomic handshake RPC,
   replica or connection failures, and no deeper nightly sweep is
   scheduled.

20.  Changes Since -02

   *  Added a signed revocation_mode that distinguishes direct
      revocation from cascade revocation of future descendant authority
      claims.

   *  Required ancestor revocation and descendant reservation to
      serialize in one authoritative atomic state domain, with explicit
      race and unavailable-status behavior.

   *  Separated revocation from in-flight reconciliation and from any
      separately authorized wind-down authority, and added corresponding
      failure codes and conformance cases.

21.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.  A future revision may request a
   media type and registries for receipt versions, scope profiles,
   holder methods, and failure codes after implementation experience
   stabilizes the protocol.

22.  References

22.1.  Normative References

   [BCP14]    Internet Engineering Task Force, "Key Words for Use in
              RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels", BCP 14, 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp14>.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC3339]  Klyne, G. and C. Newman, "Date and Time on the Internet:
              Timestamps", RFC 3339, DOI 10.17487/RFC3339, July 2002,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3339>.

   [RFC8032]  Josefsson, S. and I. Liusvaara, "Edwards-Curve Digital
              Signature Algorithm (EdDSA)", RFC 8032,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8032, January 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8032>.





Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 24]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities             August 2026


   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

   [RFC8785]  Rundgren, A., Jordan, B., and S. Erdtman, "JSON
              Canonicalization Scheme (JCS)", RFC 8785,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8785, June 2020,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8785>.

22.2.  Informative References

   [AIP]      Prakash, S., "Agent Identity Protocol (AIP): Verifiable
              Delegation for AI Agent Systems", 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-prakash-aip/>.

   [ATTENUATING]
              Aimable, N., "Attenuating Authorization Tokens for Agentic
              Delegation Chains", 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-niyikiza-oauth-
              attenuating-agent-tokens/>.

   [CB4A]     Hartman, K. G., "Credential Broker for Agents (CB4A)",
              2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-hartman-
              credential-broker-4-agents/>.

   [CBC]      Huu, T. N., Nikitin, S., and J. O'Leary, "Condition-
              Bounded Credentials for Workload and Agent Identity: Non-
              Exfiltratable Keys and Validity by Presence", 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-winmagic-wimse-
              condition-bounded-credentials/>.

   [DRP]      Nelson, R., "Delegation Receipt Protocol for AI Agent
              Authorization", 2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/
              draft-nelson-agent-delegation-receipts/>.

   [EP-QUORUM]
              Schrock, I., "Multi-Party Authorization (Quorum) for the
              EMILIA Protocol", 2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/
              draft-schrock-ep-quorum/>.

   [HAWKINS]  Hawkins, W., "Attested Payment Authorization for
              Autonomous Agents", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft,
              draft-hawkins-scitt-attested-agent-payment-00, 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-hawkins-scitt-
              attested-agent-payment/>.






Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 25]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities             August 2026


   [PEDIGREE] Rampalli, K., "PEDIGREE: Verifiable Delegation Identity
              for Agentic AI Systems", 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-rampalli-
              pedigree/>.

   [RFC9396]  Lodderstedt, T., Richer, J., and B. Campbell, "OAuth 2.0
              Rich Authorization Requests", RFC 9396,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9396, May 2023,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9396>.

   [TOKEN-BUDGETS]
              Khan, S., "Token Budgets: An Empirical Catalog of 63 LLM-
              Agent Budget-Overrun Incidents, with an Affine-Typed Rust
              Mitigation as a Case Study", arXiv 2606.04056, 2026,
              <https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.04056>.

   [TXN-TOKENS]
              Tulshibagwale, A., Fletcher, G., and P. Kasselman,
              "Transaction Tokens", 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-oauth-
              transaction-tokens/>.

Author's Address

   Iman Schrock
   EMILIA Protocol, Inc.
   United States of America
   Email: team@emiliaprotocol.ai























Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 26]
