



Network Working Group                                         I. Schrock
Internet-Draft                                     EMILIA Protocol, Inc.
Intended status: Informational                             3 August 2026
Expires: 4 February 2027


      The Action Evidence Boundary for Consequential Agent Effects
               draft-schrock-action-evidence-boundary-03

Abstract

   Consequential agent actions can cross identity, transport,
   authorization, policy, and execution systems.  Each system can
   produce a valid artifact while the executor still lacks a safe rule
   for joining the artifacts to the exact effect, consuming one-time
   authority, and handling an uncertain outcome.  This document defines
   the Action Evidence Boundary (AEB), an executor-side processing model
   for that lifecycle.

   AEB requires native artifact verification, Canonical Action
   Identifier (CAID) matching, Authorization Evidence Chain (AEC)
   satisfaction, a separate local authorization decision, durable atomic
   consumption or reservation, invocation, closed effect outcomes, and
   authenticated reconciliation.  It defines no receipt or token format,
   no policy language, no universal evidence taxonomy, and no new
   registry.  Native workload credentials, message signatures, attested
   per-action tokens, permit records, authorization receipts, and status
   mechanisms retain their own semantics and verifiers.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 4 February 2027.






Schrock                  Expires 4 February 2027                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary             August 2026


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.1.  Scope and Non-Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   2.  Conventions and Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  Non-Collapsing Decision and Lifecycle Vocabulary  . . . . . .   5
   4.  Relying-Party Inputs and Pins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   5.  Required Processing Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     5.1.  Construct the Observed Material Action  . . . . . . . . .   7
     5.2.  Verify Each Native Artifact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     5.3.  Establish CAID Material-Action MATCH  . . . . . . . . . .   8
     5.4.  Evaluate AEC Evidence Satisfaction  . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     5.5.  Pinned Boundary Requirement and Evaluation Record . . . .   9
     5.6.  Make the Local Authorization Decision . . . . . . . . . .  10
     5.7.  Atomically Consume or Reserve Before Invocation . . . . .  10
     5.8.  Invoke the Frozen Action  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     5.9.  Classify the Effect Outcome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     5.10. Perform Authenticated Reconciliation  . . . . . . . . . .  12
   6.  Declaration and Challenge Semantics . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   7.  Native Evidence and Transport Boundaries  . . . . . . . . . .  13
     7.1.  WIMSE and HTTP Message Signatures . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     7.2.  Attested Per-Action Tokens and Permit Records . . . . . .  14
   8.  Conformance and Deployment Claims . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   9.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   10. Privacy Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   11. Relationship to EMILIA and Adjacent Work  . . . . . . . . . .  16
   12. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   13. Changes since -02 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   14. Implementation Status . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   15. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
     15.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
     15.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   Appendix A.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19



Schrock                  Expires 4 February 2027                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary             August 2026


1.  Introduction

   A remote executor can receive several independently useful inputs: a
   workload credential and protected request, a delegation or
   capability, a pre-execution permit, a human-authorization artifact,
   and a policy decision.  None of those inputs alone answers every
   question the consequence-owning system has to answer before changing
   its system of record.

   The missing contract is at the effect boundary.  The executor must
   determine what exact material action it is about to perform; verify
   each artifact under its native rules; correlate independently
   verified representations without guessing; evaluate whether the
   evidence bundle fills its requirement; make its own authorization
   decision; consume or reserve any one-time or bounded authority;
   invoke the effect once; and preserve uncertainty when the effect
   cannot be observed conclusively.

   This document defines that contract.  Its required order is:

    native verification
           |
           v
    CAID material-action MATCH
           |
           v
    AEC evidence SATISFIED
           |
           v
    local policy AUTHORIZED
           |
           v
    atomic CONSUMED / RESERVED
           |
           v
    durable DISPATCH_PENDING
           |
           v
    INVOKED
           |
           +--> EXECUTED
           +--> FAILED
           +--> INDETERMINATE --> authenticated reconciliation








Schrock                  Expires 4 February 2027                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary             August 2026


   Every arrow is conditional.  A signature is not authority.  Native
   verification is not action correlation.  Action correlation is not
   evidence satisfaction.  Evidence satisfaction is not local
   authorization.  Authorization is not execution.  An invocation error
   is not proof that no effect occurred.

1.1.  Scope and Non-Goals

   AEB specifies processing requirements for a boundary that controls a
   consequential effect.  It can be implemented at a protocol gateway,
   service mesh component, application middleware, execution adapter, or
   system-of-record write path, provided the deployment states which
   effect paths the boundary actually mediates.

   AEB does not define:

   *  a new authorization receipt, access token, attestation token,
      permit, credential, or execution-evidence format;

   *  a native signature, credential, revocation, status, or
      transparency verification algorithm;

   *  a policy language, universal authorization decision, or universal
      human-approval inference;

   *  general semantic equivalence between actions;

   *  provider truth, physical truth, legality, safety, wisdom, or
      complete mediation merely because an AEB implementation is
      present; or

   *  a registry for evidence types, states, action mappings, or
      verifier names.

2.  Conventions and Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

   BCP 14 is indexed by the RFC Editor at [BCP14].

   Effect boundary:  The last control point that can withhold the
      protected mutation before it is submitted to the effecting system.

   Relying party:  The party that selects trust inputs, action



Schrock                  Expires 4 February 2027                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary             August 2026


      definitions, mapping profiles, evidence requirements, freshness
      rules, and local authorization policy, and that relies on the
      resulting decision.

   Native artifact:  An evidence, credential, permit, token, receipt,
      status, or message-protection object defined outside AEB and
      verified under its own specification.

   Observed action:  The immutable material action constructed by the
      effect boundary from executor-controlled parsing and system-of-
      record facts.

   Material field:  A field whose change can alter the protected
      consequence, as declared by the selected CAID action-type
      definition.

   Invocation:  The first dispatch of the frozen authorized action to a
      component that can cause the protected effect.

   Authoritative reconciliation:  An authenticated, audience-bound
      observation from the effecting provider or system of record that
      is matched to the original action and operation identifier.

3.  Non-Collapsing Decision and Lifecycle Vocabulary

   AEB uses the following decisions with the meanings established by the
   EMILIA architecture and its component drafts:

   VERIFIED:  One native artifact passed its native verifier under
      relying-party-selected trust inputs.

   MATCH:  Independently verified artifacts denote the same material
      action directly or under exact relying-party-pinned CAID mapping
      profiles.

   SATISFIED:  Verified and matched evidence fills every slot in the
      relying party's AEC requirement.

   AUTHORIZED:  The consequence-owning relying party's local policy
      permits this exact action at this time.

   EXECUTED:  The executor records, or an accepted native artifact
      attests, that the exact effect occurred.  This meaning remains
      bounded by the native source and its trust assumptions.

   AEB also names operational lifecycle states:

   CONSUMED:  A one-time authorization, challenge, operation key, or



Schrock                  Expires 4 February 2027                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary             August 2026


      equivalent native replay unit has been durably made unavailable
      for another invocation.

   RESERVED:  Bounded state, such as a capability budget, has been
      durably fenced for the exact operation before invocation.

   DISPATCH_PENDING:  A durable intent record binds the frozen action,
      operation identifier, provider environment, and reservation before
      any effecting dispatch can occur.  Recovery treats a stranded
      intent as uncertain, not as unused authority.

   INVOKED:  The protected effect was dispatched using the frozen
      authorized action and operation identifier.

   FAILED:  Authoritative executor or reconciliation evidence
      establishes that the invoked operation did not cause the protected
      effect.  A local exception or timeout alone is not sufficient.

   INDETERMINATE:  Invocation began, but available authoritative
      evidence does not establish whether the protected effect occurred.

   CONSUMED, RESERVED, DISPATCH_PENDING, INVOKED, FAILED, and
   INDETERMINATE are lifecycle terms, not new evidence types or IANA
   registry values.  A deployment MAY use different local labels if
   their semantics are at least as strict.

4.  Relying-Party Inputs and Pins

   The requester, presenter, agent, and mutable intermediary context are
   untrusted inputs.  They MAY propose an action and present native
   artifacts.  They MUST NOT select or weaken the controls used to
   accept that request.

   Before evaluating an action, the relying party MUST configure or pin,
   as applicable:

   *  the supported native artifact revisions, verifier adapters,
      algorithms, trust anchors, issuers, audiences, and status sources;

   *  the CAID suite, action-type definition source, exact source
      descriptors, and mapping-profile digests;

   *  the AEC requirement and the admissible native evidence roles for
      each slot;

   *  local policy identifiers, policy epochs, tenant and organization
      boundaries, and any separation-of-duty rule;




Schrock                  Expires 4 February 2027                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary             August 2026


   *  the trusted clock, maximum ages, validity windows, allowed skew,
      and revocation or status freshness requirements;

   *  the durable replay, consumption, reservation, and operation-key
      namespaces; and

   *  the protected executor, provider environment, reconciliation
      endpoint, and authenticated provider or system-of-record
      identities.

   A label, key, profile identifier, requirement, status assertion, or
   policy identifier carried only in presenter-controlled data MUST NOT
   become its own trust anchor.  Missing, conflicting, unsupported, or
   ambiguous required configuration MUST fail closed.

5.  Required Processing Model

5.1.  Construct the Observed Material Action

   The effect boundary MUST construct an immutable observed action from
   effect-relevant facts it controls.  Depending on the application,
   those facts can include the protocol operation, tool or method,
   target resource, tenant, account, amount, currency, destination,
   environment, input digest, and unique operation identifier.

   The boundary MUST resolve a relying-party-pinned CAID action-type
   definition and include every field that definition declares material.
   It MUST NOT copy a requester-supplied action digest, CAID, amount,
   destination, or resource reference without deriving or checking the
   corresponding fact at the protected boundary.  If the boundary cannot
   determine all material fields, it MUST refuse before invocation.

   The observed action MUST be frozen for the remainder of the
   lifecycle.  A later adapter MUST NOT reconstruct a different action
   from mutable request state after authorization.

   Before emitting or comparing a CAID, the boundary MUST validate the
   constructed action against the complete pinned action-type
   definition.  A source representation is construction-compatible only
   when a pinned mapping can derive every material target field without
   guessing.  Construction compatibility is distinct from content
   equivalence: compatible inputs can still map to different actions,
   while a missing, ambiguous, or unverified material field yields
   INDETERMINATE.







Schrock                  Expires 4 February 2027                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary             August 2026


5.2.  Verify Each Native Artifact

   Each required native artifact MUST be verified independently under
   its own specification and relying-party-selected trust inputs before
   CAID mapping or AEC evaluation.  The AEB implementation MUST use the
   integrity-protected payload returned by the native verifier, or a
   projection for which the adapter establishes integrity coverage of
   every projected field.

   A successful signature check is only one possible step of native
   verification.  Schema, algorithm, issuer, audience, key status,
   validity, proof-of-possession, freshness, replay, and native policy
   checks remain those of the selected native profile.  A verifier
   exception, unavailable required status source, unsupported critical
   field, or ambiguous result MUST become a bounded refusal, never an
   allow path.

   The output of this stage is VERIFIED for each accepted artifact.  An
   artifact that has not reached VERIFIED MUST NOT participate in action
   mapping or fill an AEC requirement slot.

5.3.  Establish CAID Material-Action MATCH

   The boundary MUST recompute the CAID of the observed action under the
   selected suite and definition source.  It MUST compare every action-
   bound required artifact to that observed action using direct CAID
   equality or the Action-Mapping Profile defined by [CAID].

   Cross-format mapping MUST occur only after native verification and
   MUST use the exact source media type, schema version, target action
   type, definition source, and mapping-profile digest pinned by the
   relying party.  Every target material field MUST be covered.
   Missing, lossy, unknown, unpinned, conflicting, or ambiguous mappings
   yield INDETERMINATE under CAID and MUST fail a required MATCH.  AEB
   MUST NOT guess equivalence from names, natural-language descriptions,
   trace identifiers, or presenter assertions.

   MATCH is content correlation only.  It does not validate a native
   artifact and does not authorize execution.

5.4.  Evaluate AEC Evidence Satisfaction

   The boundary MUST submit only natively verified, action-matched
   evidence to an AEC verifier configured with the relying party's
   requirement.  The requirement used for the decision MUST come from
   relying-party configuration, not from a presenter-controlled AEC
   member.




Schrock                  Expires 4 February 2027                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary             August 2026


   Every required evidence role MUST be filled by an artifact whose
   native verifier and adapter are accepted for that role.  A workload
   identity MUST NOT silently fill a policy-permit or human-
   authorization slot.  A machine-policy decision MUST NOT silently fill
   a named-human slot.  A generic operator signature MUST NOT be
   interpreted as evidence that a human operated a system or performed a
   named approval ceremony.

   Only a successful AEC evaluation under these inputs reaches
   SATISFIED.  UNSATISFIED, malformed, unsupported, or ambiguous results
   MUST withhold invocation.

   A qualification statement can fill an evaluation-evidence role only
   when its native verifier establishes the measured candidate,
   evaluation campaign, assignment, policy, freshness, and status.  A
   qualification result MUST NOT fill an authorization role and MUST NOT
   by itself cause SATISFIED, AUTHORIZED, reservation, or invocation.

5.5.  Pinned Boundary Requirement and Evaluation Record

   The consequence-owning relying party MUST pin the exact adapter
   revisions, trust roots, mapping profiles, AEC requirement, and
   boundary requirement used for a decision.  The presenter MUST NOT
   select or weaken those inputs.  EP-AEB-REQUIREMENT-v1 is a closed
   object whose all_of and any_of members name evidence roles and whose
   terms member carries boundary constraints:

   {
     "@version": "EP-AEB-REQUIREMENT-v1",
     "all_of": ["human-authorization", "policy-permit"],
     "terms": [
       { "type": "distinct-human-quorum",
         "role": "human-authorization", "threshold": 2 },
       { "type": "initiator-exclusion",
         "roles": ["human-authorization"] },
       { "type": "executor-exclusion",
         "roles": ["human-authorization"] },
       { "type": "one-time-consumption" }
     ]
   }

   A conforming implementation MUST reject unknown terms.  It MUST
   require exactly one one-time-consumption term.  A distinct-human-
   quorum term counts only distinct natural-person subject identifiers
   exposed by eligible native verifiers for the named role. initiator-
   exclusion and executor-exclusion compare those verified subjects with
   the boundary-owned initiator and executor identifiers.  Different
   encodings of one key or subject MUST NOT count as different humans.



Schrock                  Expires 4 February 2027                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary             August 2026


   Execution-time evaluation MUST resolve current status through
   relying-party-configured status sources.  Presenter-supplied current
   status is untrusted.  Revoked, expired, stale, unavailable,
   ambiguous, or unauthenticated required status MUST withhold
   authorization.  Historical re-performance MUST be labeled historical
   and MUST NOT be used as a current execution decision.

   The evaluator SHOULD emit a signed, re-derivable record binding the
   observed action and CAID, operation and consumption identifiers,
   initiator and executor, adapter and mapping revisions, complete
   requirement and configuration digests, native artifact digests,
   current-status snapshots, per-leg VERIFIED and MATCH results, AEC
   SATISFIED, boundary constraints, and the separate AUTHORIZED or
   REFUSED verdict.  The record is evidence of the evaluator's decision;
   it does not itself perform or authorize an effect.

5.6.  Make the Local Authorization Decision

   The consequence-owning executor MUST make a separate local
   authorization decision after SATISFIED.  It MUST evaluate the exact
   observed action, audience, tenant, organization, policy epoch,
   freshness, current credential and authority status, separation of
   duties, local risk controls, and any bounded capability state.

   Credential revocation and per-action authorization evidence answer
   different questions.  A current non-revocation or status result can
   establish that a credential remains acceptable under local policy; it
   does not prove that the credential holder authorized this action.  A
   per-action authorization artifact does not prove that every
   credential in its trust path remains current.  When policy requires
   both, the boundary MUST verify both without substituting one for the
   other.

   The boundary reaches AUTHORIZED only if local policy permits the
   exact action at the decision time.  SATISFIED alone MUST NOT trigger
   reservation or invocation.

5.7.  Atomically Consume or Reserve Before Invocation

   After AUTHORIZED and before invocation, the boundary MUST perform the
   durable state transition required by the native evidence and local
   policy.  This can include consuming a one-time authorization,
   challenge nonce, or operation key; reserving a bounded capability or
   budget; and fencing the operation to one owner across replicas.

   The transition MUST be atomic within the relying party's durable
   state domain.  Its key MUST be derived from verified evidence or the
   executor-owned observed action and operation identifier, never from a



Schrock                  Expires 4 February 2027               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary             August 2026


   presenter-selected decoy.  If the store is unavailable, non-atomic,
   stale, or reports an ambiguous result, the boundary MUST refuse
   before invocation.

   AEB does not claim atomicity between a local store and an unrelated
   remote provider.  It requires the local consume or reserve transition
   to occur first so that any uncertainty after dispatch cannot make the
   same authority available for an uncontrolled second effect.

5.8.  Invoke the Frozen Action

   Before any call, message, or byte can reach an effecting component,
   the boundary MUST durably enter DISPATCH_PENDING for the frozen
   observed action that reached AUTHORIZED and CONSUMED or RESERVED.
   The record MUST bind the action digest, operation identifier,
   provider environment, audience, reservation or consumption record,
   and adapter.  Failure or ambiguity while writing this record MUST
   withhold dispatch.

   The boundary MUST invoke only from that durable state.  It MUST use a
   stable, action-bound, unique operation identifier or idempotency key
   where the provider supports one.  After dispatch begins, it MUST
   durably record INVOKED or a terminal outcome before reporting success
   to the requester.

   The adapter MUST receive only the authority and evidence necessary
   for the downstream interface.  It MUST NOT accept mutable
   intermediary or caller context that changes a material field after
   the boundary's authorization decision.

5.9.  Classify the Effect Outcome

   After invocation begins, the boundary MUST classify the result as
   EXECUTED, FAILED, or INDETERMINATE.  On restart, a DISPATCH_PENDING
   operation without an authoritative terminal record MUST be promoted
   to INDETERMINATE before any retry or release, because the process
   cannot establish that dispatch did not begin.

   *  EXECUTED requires an authoritative response or accepted native
      execution evidence matched to the exact action, operation
      identifier, provider environment, and audience.

   *  FAILED requires authoritative evidence that the invoked operation
      did not cause the protected effect.  A local parse error,
      exception, timeout, connection loss, process crash, or missing
      response is not by itself such evidence.





Schrock                  Expires 4 February 2027               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary             August 2026


   *  INDETERMINATE is REQUIRED whenever invocation may have reached the
      effecting system but the available authoritative evidence does not
      establish EXECUTED or FAILED.

   For EXECUTED, the boundary MUST commit any reserved spend and
   preserve the terminal evidence.  For FAILED, it MUST preserve the
   failure evidence and follow the native reservation policy.  For
   INDETERMINATE, it MUST preserve or consume the reservation, refuse
   reuse of the authorization and operation identifier, and prohibit a
   blind replay.

5.10.  Perform Authenticated Reconciliation

   An INDETERMINATE operation, including one recovered from a stranded
   DISPATCH_PENDING record, MUST remain closed until reconciliation
   authenticates the provider or system of record and matches the result
   to the original action, operation identifier, provider environment,
   audience, target resource, and every application-specific material
   field.

   Reconciliation MAY move INDETERMINATE to EXECUTED when authoritative
   evidence establishes that the exact effect occurred.  It MAY move
   INDETERMINATE to FAILED when authoritative evidence establishes that
   it did not occur.  Missing, stale, conflicting, unauthenticated, or
   action-mismatched observations MUST leave the operation
   INDETERMINATE.

   Reconciliation MUST NOT resurrect the original authorization or
   silently release its one-time replay unit.  If policy permits a later
   attempt after an authoritative FAILED result, that attempt MUST use a
   new action instance and complete the lifecycle required by local
   policy.  An implementation MUST NOT invoke again merely because a
   timeout elapsed or because the caller retried.

6.  Declaration and Challenge Semantics

   A deployment MAY publish a static declaration describing protected
   actions, material fields, evidence requirements, challenge methods,
   and effect-boundary placement.  Such a declaration is discovery
   metadata.  It MUST NOT override the relying party's live, local
   enforcement configuration.  An unsupported declaration version MUST
   be ignored as discovery input; it cannot weaken or replace live
   enforcement.  An action that the live boundary configuration cannot
   classify or process under a supported version MUST fail closed.

   When required evidence is absent or unacceptable, a boundary MAY use
   its application protocol to return a dynamic challenge.  A challenge
   MUST identify the boundary-computed action, the missing evidence



Schrock                  Expires 4 February 2027               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary             August 2026


   roles, the policy context, an intended audience, a short expiry, and
   a single-use unpredictable nonce or equivalent replay unit.  The
   nonce MUST NOT be consumed merely because untrusted bytes parse.  It
   MUST be consumed atomically only after the selected native verifier
   establishes the integrity and challenge binding of an in-window
   presentation, and before that presentation can reach SATISFIED or
   authorize an effect.  A presentation that is malformed,
   unauthenticated, expired, or not bound to the challenge MUST be
   refused without burning the nonce.  A natively verified, challenge-
   bound presentation consumes the nonce whether or not the remaining
   evidence satisfies the requirement.  Follow-up challenges MUST remain
   bound to the original boundary-computed action and MUST NOT derive
   that action from presenter input.

   A declaration or challenge authorizes nothing, reserves nothing, and
   promises no execution.  A satisfied challenge still proceeds through
   native verification, MATCH, SATISFIED, local AUTHORIZED, and atomic
   consumption or reservation.  This document intentionally defines no
   new manifest object, challenge object, well-known URI, HTTP status
   code, or media type.

7.  Native Evidence and Transport Boundaries

7.1.  WIMSE and HTTP Message Signatures

   WIMSE workload credentials and the WIMSE HTTP Message Signatures
   profile [WIMSE-HTTP] can provide end-to-end workload authentication
   and message integrity for the request components covered by the
   validated signature, including a body protected by a validated
   content digest.  HTTP Message Signatures [RFC9421] provide the
   underlying component-signing mechanism.

   AEB consumes those results; it does not redefine them.  A validated
   WIMSE request can establish which workload possessed the protected
   key and that covered message components were not modified
   undetectably.  It does not by itself establish CAID MATCH, AEC
   SATISFIED, named-human authorization, local AUTHORIZED, one-time
   consumption, or execution.

   The AI Agent Authentication and Authorization framework [KLRC-AUTH]
   and the WIMSE authorization-evidence profile [MUNOZ-WIMSE-EVIDENCE]
   describe adjacent runtime authorization and signed-evidence
   compositions.  AEB treats their selected credentials, tokens, and
   evidence records as native inputs.  It does not replace their
   issuance, verification, or authorization semantics.






Schrock                  Expires 4 February 2027               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary             August 2026


   PEDIGREE [PEDIGREE] describes native identity and delegation-chain
   evidence.  The AEB result records whether the relying party's stated
   delegation requirement was satisfied by the mapped evidence.  It does
   not reinterpret, re-derive, or override the delegation protocol's
   native decision.  In particular, a PEDIGREE completion block is post-
   effect evidence and MUST NOT fill a pre-action authorization role.

   Headers, routing metadata, forwarded identity, trace context, or
   other values that an intermediary can add, remove, or mutate outside
   the validated end-to-end integrity coverage MUST NOT be load-bearing
   authorization evidence.  They MAY be used for routing or diagnostics.
   If such a value affects the protected consequence, the boundary MUST
   derive it independently or require it to be covered by accepted
   native integrity and the observed action's material binding.

7.2.  Attested Per-Action Tokens and Permit Records

   Attested per-action tokens, including artifacts described by a
   deployment as OASNT-like, remain native evidence formats.  AEB does
   not assign that descriptive label a token type, claim set, registry
   entry, or trust meaning.  The selected native verifier determines
   what the token proves and exposes its integrity-protected action
   commitment, issuer, audience, validity, freshness, status, and
   bounded result to the AEB adapter.

   SCITT Permit records defined by [MUNOZ-PERMIT] likewise remain native
   pre-execution decision evidence.  AEB does not reserialize a Permit
   or convert it into an AEB receipt.  It verifies the selected Permit
   revision through its native adapter, maps its protected material
   action only through a pinned CAID profile, and assigns it only to
   evidence roles permitted by the relying party's AEC requirement.

   A native format's valid signature proves only the statement and
   signer semantics that format defines.  It does not, without an
   additional accepted profile and evidence, prove that a natural person
   operated the workload, understood the action, held authority, or
   performed a particular approval ceremony.

8.  Conformance and Deployment Claims

   An implementation conforms to AEB only if every protected invocation
   follows the ordered processing model in Section 5 and fails closed on
   every missing or ambiguous required transition.  A deployment MUST
   document:

   *  the protected action types and the effect paths actually mediated;

   *  the trusted configuration and durable-state boundaries;



Schrock                  Expires 4 February 2027               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary             August 2026


   *  the native verifier revisions and relying-party pins;

   *  the method used to derive material action fields at the boundary;

   *  the consumption, reservation, and cross-replica fencing mechanism;

   *  the authoritative sources and matching rules used for
      reconciliation; and

   *  all direct, break-glass, administrator, alternate-protocol, and
      system-of-record paths that bypass the AEB implementation.

   An implementation placed beside a write path is not complete
   mediation.  A deployment MUST NOT claim complete mediation unless the
   protected system rejects all material alternate paths or subjects
   them to an equivalent boundary.  Observe-only operation MAY be useful
   during deployment, but it MUST NOT be described as enforcement.

9.  Security Considerations

   *Cross-binding.* An attacker can splice a valid permit, approval,
   credential, or receipt for action A into a request for action B.
   Native verification before mapping, executor-owned action
   construction, exact CAID matching, and a relying-party-pinned AEC
   requirement are all required defenses.  Omitting any one of them
   reopens the attack.

   *Mutable context.* Intermediary-added headers and agent annotations
   are convenient but are not trustworthy merely because they arrived on
   an authenticated hop.  Every load-bearing field needs accepted end-
   to-end integrity coverage or independent derivation at the effect
   boundary.

   *Time of check and time of use.* The action passed to the executor
   must be the frozen action that was verified, matched, satisfied,
   authorized, and consumed or reserved.  Mutable aliases, provider
   defaults, exchange rates, destinations, branch heads, and policy
   epochs can change a consequence after approval; profiles must bind or
   revalidate them as material fields.

   *Replay and distributed state.* Process-local caches are insufficient
   where replicas can invoke the same effect.  Replay, consumption,
   reservation, and operation ownership state must be durable, atomic,
   and shared across every boundary instance that can reach the
   protected executor.






Schrock                  Expires 4 February 2027               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary             August 2026


   *Freshness and revocation.* Expiration, nonce checks, credential
   status, authority status, and policy epoch are separate checks.  A
   fresh message does not make a revoked credential valid, and a current
   credential does not make old per-action evidence fresh.

   *Indeterminate effects.* Retrying after a timeout can duplicate a
   payment, mutation, disclosure, or physical action.  An invocation
   that might have reached the provider consumes the operation's retry
   right until authenticated reconciliation resolves the exact outcome.
   Caller assurances and unauthenticated webhooks do not resolve it.

   *Signature overclaiming.* A cryptographic signature can establish
   control of a key and integrity of covered content under a selected
   verification profile.  It does not inherently identify a human, prove
   human operation, prove comprehension, establish legal authority, or
   prove execution.

   *Boundary bypass.* A correct AEB implementation does not protect
   direct database credentials, alternate APIs, shell access,
   administrator consoles, side channels, or actuator paths that bypass
   it.  Deployment topology and credential placement are security
   properties, not implementation details.

10.  Privacy Considerations

   Action objects and evidence can expose identities, destinations,
   resources, policy choices, commercial relationships, and sensitive
   operational timing.  Deployments SHOULD minimize the evidence passed
   to the executor and retained in portable records, use opaque high-
   entropy references where appropriate, and avoid treating a plain
   digest of low-entropy personal data as anonymization.

   Reconciliation queries can disclose that an operation is disputed or
   uncertain.  They SHOULD be authenticated, authorized, rate-limited,
   and limited to the exact operation.  AEB does not require public
   disclosure of native evidence or local policy.

11.  Relationship to EMILIA and Adjacent Work

   CAID [CAID] owns typed material-action identity and exact, relying-
   party-pinned cross-format mapping.  AEB invokes CAID after native
   verification and does not extend CAID with trust semantics.

   AEC [AEC] owns heterogeneous evidence composition and the SATISFIED
   or UNSATISFIED result under a relying-party requirement.  AEB invokes
   AEC and then makes the separate local authorization and effect-
   lifecycle decisions.




Schrock                  Expires 4 February 2027               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary             August 2026


   Authorization Receipts [RECEIPTS] define one native action-bound
   organizational approval artifact and its receipt-specific consumption
   semantics.  AEB does not make that format mandatory and does not
   generalize every native artifact into an EMILIA receipt.

   Static declarations and dynamic evidence challenges remain distinct
   protocol surfaces.  A manifest can advertise discovery metadata,
   while an Authorization Evidence Challenge can carry the live, action-
   bound refusal and acquisition instructions.  AEB owns the executor
   lifecycle in which those inputs are evaluated; it does not absorb or
   replace their wire formats.

   Qualification, revocation, remedy, and action-to-outcome continuity
   artifacts are optional native inputs or downstream records.  They
   retain their own semantics.  AEB composes them only through pinned
   verification, exact-action binding, local policy, durable custody,
   and authenticated reconciliation.

   A refusal MAY be represented by an action-bound signed refusal
   statement.  The refusal artifact records what the boundary refused
   and why; it MUST NOT be interpreted as proof that every bypass path
   was mediated, that delivery to a requester occurred, or that a later
   action was refused.

12.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.  In particular, it creates no
   registry for native evidence types, lifecycle labels, verifier
   adapters, action mappings, or policy identifiers.

13.  Changes since -02

   This revision defines the relying-party-pinned boundary requirement,
   makes distinct-human quorum, initiator exclusion, executor exclusion,
   one-time consumption, and current-status handling explicit terms, and
   specifies the content of a signed re-derivable evaluation record.  It
   also clarifies the narrow evidentiary role of signed refusal
   statements.  The ordered AEB processing model and native-protocol
   ownership boundaries are unchanged.

14.  Implementation Status

   The Apache-2.0 reference implementation provides relying-party-pinned
   adapter and mapping registries, multi-leg CAID joins, the boundary
   terms defined above, current-status verification, signed
   configuration-bound evaluation records, durable ownership-fenced one-
   time consumption, execution reservation and reconciliation, and
   signed refusal statements.  Conformance vectors and adversarial tests



Schrock                  Expires 4 February 2027               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary             August 2026


   cover the reference contract.  These same-team artifacts are not an
   independent implementation and do not prove that a deployment
   mediates every effect path.

15.  References

15.1.  Normative References

   [AEC]      Schrock, I., "Authorization Evidence Chains: Composing
              Heterogeneous Agent-Action Evidence (EP-AEC)", Work in
              Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-schrock-ep-authorization-
              evidence-chain-05, July 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-schrock-ep-
              authorization-evidence-chain/>.

   [BCP14]    Internet Engineering Task Force, "Key Words for Use in
              RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels", BCP 14, 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp14>.

   [CAID]     Schrock, I., "The Canonical Action Identifier (CAID)",
              Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-schrock-canonical-
              action-identifier-01, July 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-schrock-canonical-
              action-identifier/>.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

15.2.  Informative References

   [KLRC-AUTH]
              Kasselman, P., Lombardo, J., Rosomakho, Y., Campbell, B.,
              Steele, N., and A. Parecki, "AI Agent Authentication and
              Authorization", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-
              klrc-aiagent-auth-03, July 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-klrc-aiagent-
              auth/>.








Schrock                  Expires 4 February 2027               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary             August 2026


   [MUNOZ-PERMIT]
              Munoz, C., "A SCITT Profile for Pre-Execution AI Action
              Authorization Records", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft,
              draft-munoz-scitt-permit-profile-01, July 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-munoz-scitt-
              permit-profile/>.

   [MUNOZ-WIMSE-EVIDENCE]
              Munoz, C., "Signed Authorization-Evidence Records for
              WIMSE-Authorized AI Agent Actions", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-munoz-wimse-authorization-evidence-
              01, July 2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-
              munoz-wimse-authorization-evidence/>.

   [PEDIGREE] Rampalli, K., "PEDIGREE: Verifiable Delegation Identity
              for Agentic AI Systems", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft,
              draft-rampalli-pedigree-00, April 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-rampalli-
              pedigree/>.

   [RECEIPTS] Schrock, I., "Authorization Receipts for High-Risk Agent
              Actions", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-schrock-
              ep-authorization-receipts-08, July 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-schrock-ep-
              authorization-receipts/>.

   [RFC9421]  Backman, A., Ed., Richer, J., Ed., and M. Sporny, "HTTP
              Message Signatures", RFC 9421, DOI 10.17487/RFC9421,
              February 2024, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9421>.

   [WIMSE-HTTP]
              Salowey, J. and Y. Sheffer, "WIMSE Workload-to-Workload
              Authentication with HTTP Signatures", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-wimse-http-signature-05, July
              2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-wimse-
              http-signature/>.

Appendix A.  Acknowledgments

   External review sharpened the boundaries between workload and message
   integrity, per-action authorization evidence, credential status,
   human operation, and executor-owned effect control.  Those
   distinctions are load-bearing in this document.  Acknowledgment does
   not imply endorsement.

Author's Address





Schrock                  Expires 4 February 2027               [Page 19]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary             August 2026


   Iman Schrock
   EMILIA Protocol, Inc.
   United States of America
   Email: team@emiliaprotocol.ai















































Schrock                  Expires 4 February 2027               [Page 20]
