



Network Working Group                                         I. Schrock
Internet-Draft                                     EMILIA Protocol, Inc.
Intended status: Informational                         24 September 2026
Expires: 28 March 2027


      The Action Evidence Boundary for Consequential Agent Effects
               draft-schrock-action-evidence-boundary-06

Abstract

   Consequential agent actions can cross identity, transport,
   authorization, policy, and execution systems.  Each system can
   produce a valid artifact while the executor still lacks a safe rule
   for joining the artifacts to the exact effect, consuming one-time
   authority, and handling an uncertain outcome.  This document defines
   the Action Evidence Boundary (AEB), an executor-side processing model
   for that lifecycle.

   AEB requires native artifact verification, exact-action binding, a
   relying-party authorization decision, stable replay identity, durable
   atomic consumption or reservation, provider entry, closed effect
   outcomes, and authenticated reconciliation.  CAID matching is used
   when independently encoded native representations must be joined.
   AEC is used when local policy requires multiple evidence legs.  A
   native authorization decision accepted and enforced by the effect-
   owning PEP does not require a second PDP.  AEB defines no receipt or
   token format, no policy language, no universal evidence taxonomy, and
   no new registry.  Native workload credentials, OAuth artifacts,
   AuthZEN decisions, AP2 mandates, message signatures, permits,
   authorization receipts, and status mechanisms retain their own
   semantics and verifiers.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."




Schrock                   Expires 28 March 2027                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   This Internet-Draft will expire on 28 March 2027.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.1.  Scope and Non-Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   2.  Conventions and Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   3.  Non-Collapsing Decision and Lifecycle Vocabulary  . . . . . .   6
   4.  Relying-Party Inputs and Pins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   5.  Required Processing Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     5.1.  Construct the Observed Material Action  . . . . . . . . .   8
     5.2.  Verify Each Native Artifact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     5.3.  Establish Exact-Action Correspondence . . . . . . . . . .   9
     5.4.  Evaluate Required Field-Origin Assertions . . . . . . . .  10
     5.5.  Evaluate Additional Evidence Requirements When
            Required . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     5.6.  Pinned Boundary Requirement and Evaluation Record . . . .  11
     5.7.  Make the Local Authorization Decision . . . . . . . . . .  13
     5.8.  Derive a Stable Replay Identity . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     5.9.  Atomically Consume or Reserve Before Invocation . . . . .  14
     5.10. Enter the Provider with the Frozen Effect . . . . . . . .  14
     5.11. Classify the Effect Outcome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     5.12. Perform Authenticated Reconciliation  . . . . . . . . . .  15
   6.  Declaration and Challenge Semantics . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   7.  Native Evidence and Transport Boundaries  . . . . . . . . . .  17
     7.1.  WIMSE and HTTP Message Signatures . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
     7.2.  AuthZEN and COAZ  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
     7.3.  Attested Per-Action Tokens and Permit Records . . . . . .  18
   8.  Native Compilation Contract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
     8.1.  Pinned Inputs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
     8.2.  Deterministic Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
     8.3.  Closed Compile Result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
     8.4.  Semantic-Loss Report  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
     8.5.  Stable Native Replay Unit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22



Schrock                   Expires 28 March 2027                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


     8.6.  Path and Provider Ownership . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
     8.7.  Compilation Conformance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
   9.  Conformance and Deployment Claims . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
   10. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
   11. Privacy Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  26
   12. Relationship to EMILIA and Adjacent Work  . . . . . . . . . .  26
   13. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
   14. Changes since -05 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
   15. Implementation Status . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
   16. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  28
     16.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  28
     16.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  29
   Appendix A.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  31
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  31

1.  Introduction

   A remote executor can receive several independently useful inputs: a
   workload credential and protected request, a delegation or
   capability, a pre-execution permit, a human-authorization artifact,
   and a policy decision.  None of those inputs alone answers every
   question the consequence-owning system has to answer before changing
   its system of record.

   The missing contract is at the effect boundary after authorization.
   The executor must determine what exact material action it is about to
   perform; verify each native artifact; preserve the authorization
   result produced by the selected native path; correlate independently
   encoded representations without guessing when such a join is
   required; derive a stable replay identity; consume or reserve any
   one-time or bounded authority; enter the provider once; and preserve
   uncertainty when the effect cannot be observed conclusively.

   This document defines that contract.  Its required order is:

















Schrock                   Expires 28 March 2027                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


    native verification
           |
           v
    exact-action correspondence
    (native binding, or CAID for a cross-format join)
           |
           v
    additional evidence SATISFIED when required
    (AEC for a multi-leg requirement)
           |
           v
    native PEP or local AUTHORIZED
           |
           v
    stable native replay identity
           |
           v
    atomic CONSUMED / RESERVED
           |
           v
    durable DISPATCH_PENDING at provider entry
           |
           v
    INVOKED
           |
           +--> EXECUTED
           +--> FAILED
           +--> INDETERMINATE --> authenticated reconciliation

   The CAID and AEC stages are conditional.  A native authorization path
   can bind one operation directly and satisfy the relying party without
   a cross-format join or a multi-leg requirement.  A signature is not
   authority.  Native verification is not action correlation.  Action
   correlation is not evidence satisfaction.  Evidence satisfaction is
   not authorization.  Authorization is not provider entry or execution.
   An invocation error is not proof that no effect occurred.

1.1.  Scope and Non-Goals

   AEB specifies processing requirements for a boundary that controls a
   consequential effect.  It can be implemented at a protocol gateway,
   service mesh component, application middleware, execution adapter, or
   system-of-record write path, provided the deployment states which
   effect paths the boundary actually mediates.

   AEB does not define:





Schrock                   Expires 28 March 2027                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   *  a new authorization receipt, access token, attestation token,
      permit, credential, or execution-evidence format;

   *  a native signature, credential, revocation, status, or
      transparency verification algorithm;

   *  a policy language, universal authorization decision, or universal
      human-approval inference;

   *  a second policy decision point, a replacement for an existing
      protocol-to-authorization mapping, or a requirement that an
      authorization result be re-decided under AEB;

   *  general semantic equivalence between actions;

   *  provider truth, physical truth, legality, safety, wisdom, or
      complete mediation merely because an AEB implementation is
      present; or

   *  a registry for evidence types, states, action mappings, or
      verifier names.

2.  Conventions and Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

   BCP 14 is indexed by the RFC Editor at [BCP14].

   Effect boundary:  The last control point that can withhold the
      protected mutation before it is submitted to the effecting system.

   Relying party:  The party that selects trust inputs, action
      definitions, mapping profiles, evidence requirements, freshness
      rules, and local authorization policy, and that relies on the
      resulting decision.

   Native artifact:  An evidence, credential, permit, token, receipt,
      status, or message-protection object defined outside AEB and
      verified under its own specification.

   Native authorization result:  A permit or refusal produced under the
      selected authorization protocol and enforced by its policy
      enforcement point.  The native protocol remains authoritative for
      the mapping, decision, and enforcement semantics it defines.



Schrock                   Expires 28 March 2027                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   Field-origin assertion:  A native artifact in which an issuer asserts
      how exact fields of an action representation were sourced or
      transformed, and optionally the point-in-time snapshot on which
      that assertion rests.  Verification establishes the issuer's
      signed assertion under pinned trust inputs; it does not
      independently establish where the bytes truly originated.

   Observed action:  The immutable material action constructed by the
      effect boundary from executor-controlled parsing and system-of-
      record facts.

   Material field:  A field whose change can alter the protected
      consequence, as declared by the selected CAID action-type
      definition.

   Invocation:  The first dispatch of the frozen authorized action to a
      component that can cause the protected effect.

   Authoritative reconciliation:  An authenticated, audience-bound
      observation from the effecting provider or system of record that
      is matched to the original action and operation identifier.

3.  Non-Collapsing Decision and Lifecycle Vocabulary

   AEB uses the following decisions with the meanings established by the
   EMILIA architecture and its component drafts:

   VERIFIED:  One native artifact passed its native verifier under
      relying-party-selected trust inputs.

   MATCH:  Independently verified artifacts denote the same material
      action directly or under exact relying-party-pinned CAID mapping
      profiles.  This state is needed when the boundary joins
      independently encoded representations; it is not an extra
      requirement for a single native representation whose exact-action
      binding is preserved through provider entry.

   SATISFIED:  Verified and matched evidence fills every slot in the
      relying party's AEC requirement.  This state applies when local
      policy selects a multi-leg AEC requirement.

   AUTHORIZED:  The effect-owning PEP accepts a native authorization
      result, or the consequence-owning relying party's local policy
      permits, this exact action at this time.  AEB records this result;
      it does not require a second PDP.

   EXECUTED:  The executor records, or an accepted native artifact




Schrock                   Expires 28 March 2027                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


      attests, that the exact effect occurred.  This meaning remains
      bounded by the native source and its trust assumptions.

   AEB also names operational lifecycle states:

   CONSUMED:  A one-time authorization, challenge, operation key, or
      equivalent native replay unit has been durably made unavailable
      for another invocation.

   RESERVED:  Bounded state, such as a capability budget, has been
      durably fenced for the exact operation before invocation.

   DISPATCH_PENDING:  A durable intent record binds the frozen action,
      operation identifier, provider environment, and reservation before
      any effecting dispatch can occur.  Recovery treats a stranded
      intent as uncertain, not as unused authority.

   INVOKED:  The protected effect was dispatched using the frozen
      authorized action and operation identifier.

   FAILED:  Authoritative executor or reconciliation evidence
      establishes that the invoked operation did not cause the protected
      effect.  A local exception or timeout alone is not sufficient.

   INDETERMINATE:  Invocation began, but available authoritative
      evidence does not establish whether the protected effect occurred.

   CONSUMED, RESERVED, DISPATCH_PENDING, INVOKED, FAILED, and
   INDETERMINATE are lifecycle terms, not new evidence types or IANA
   registry values.  A deployment MAY use different local labels if
   their semantics are at least as strict.

4.  Relying-Party Inputs and Pins

   The requester, presenter, agent, and mutable intermediary context are
   untrusted inputs.  They MAY propose an action and present native
   artifacts.  They MUST NOT select or weaken the controls used to
   accept that request.

   Before evaluating an action, the relying party MUST configure or pin,
   as applicable:

   *  the supported native artifact revisions, verifier adapters,
      algorithms, trust anchors, issuers, audiences, and status sources;







Schrock                   Expires 28 March 2027                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   *  when field-origin evidence is required, the accepted assertion
      profile and digest, trusted issuers and keys, allowed origin
      classes and transformations for each exact field, snapshot policy,
      maximum snapshot age, and unavailable-state behavior;

   *  when independently encoded representations require a cross-format
      join, the CAID suite, action-type definition source, exact source
      descriptors, and mapping-profile digests;

   *  when local policy requires multiple evidence legs, the AEC
      requirement and the admissible native evidence roles for each
      slot;

   *  local policy identifiers, policy epochs, tenant and organization
      boundaries, and any separation-of-duty rule;

   *  the trusted clock, maximum ages, validity windows, allowed skew,
      and revocation or status freshness requirements;

   *  the durable replay, consumption, reservation, and operation-key
      namespaces; and

   *  the protected executor, provider environment, reconciliation
      endpoint, and authenticated provider or system-of-record
      identities.

   A label, key, profile identifier, requirement, status assertion, or
   policy identifier carried only in presenter-controlled data MUST NOT
   become its own trust anchor.  Missing, conflicting, unsupported, or
   ambiguous required configuration MUST fail closed.

5.  Required Processing Model

5.1.  Construct the Observed Material Action

   The effect boundary MUST construct an immutable observed action from
   effect-relevant facts it controls.  Depending on the application,
   those facts can include the protocol operation, tool or method,
   target resource, tenant, account, amount, currency, destination,
   environment, input digest, and unique operation identifier.

   The boundary MUST resolve the exact native operation profile used for
   authorization and include every field that profile makes material to
   the protected consequence.  When a cross-format join is required, it
   MUST also resolve a relying-party-pinned CAID action-type definition
   and include every field that definition declares material.  It MUST
   NOT copy a requester-supplied action digest, CAID, amount,
   destination, or resource reference without deriving or checking the



Schrock                   Expires 28 March 2027                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   corresponding fact at the protected boundary.  If the boundary cannot
   determine all material fields required by the selected native or
   cross-format profile, it MUST refuse before invocation.

   The observed action MUST be frozen for the remainder of the
   lifecycle.  A later adapter MUST NOT reconstruct a different action
   from mutable request state after authorization.

   When emitting or comparing a CAID, the boundary MUST validate the
   constructed action against the complete pinned action-type
   definition.  A source representation is construction-compatible only
   when a pinned mapping can derive every material target field without
   guessing.  Construction compatibility is distinct from content
   equivalence: compatible inputs can still map to different actions,
   while a missing, ambiguous, or unverified material field yields
   INDETERMINATE.  A boundary that does not perform a cross-format join
   still MUST preserve the native protocol's exact-operation binding
   through provider entry.

5.2.  Verify Each Native Artifact

   Each required native artifact MUST be verified independently under
   its own specification and relying-party-selected trust inputs before
   CAID mapping or AEC evaluation.  The AEB implementation MUST use the
   integrity-protected payload returned by the native verifier, or a
   projection for which the adapter establishes integrity coverage of
   every projected field.

   A successful signature check is only one possible step of native
   verification.  Schema, algorithm, issuer, audience, key status,
   validity, proof-of-possession, freshness, replay, and native policy
   checks remain those of the selected native profile.  A verifier
   exception, unavailable required status source, unsupported critical
   field, or ambiguous result MUST become a bounded refusal, never an
   allow path.

   The output of this stage is VERIFIED for each accepted artifact.  An
   artifact that has not reached VERIFIED MUST NOT participate in a
   selected action mapping or fill a selected AEC requirement slot.

5.3.  Establish Exact-Action Correspondence

   The boundary MUST establish that the exact operation authorized by
   the selected native path is the operation that will enter the
   provider.  When both are expressed in one native representation, the
   boundary MAY use the exact native identifier, digest, or protected
   operation fields defined by that protocol.




Schrock                   Expires 28 March 2027                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   When the boundary joins independently encoded representations, it
   MUST recompute the CAID of the observed action under the selected
   suite and definition source.  It MUST compare every action-bound
   required artifact to that observed action using direct CAID equality
   or the Action-Mapping Profile defined by [CAID].

   Cross-format mapping MUST occur only after native verification and
   MUST use the exact source media type, schema version, target action
   type, definition source, and mapping-profile digest pinned by the
   relying party.  Every target material field MUST be covered.
   Missing, lossy, unknown, unpinned, conflicting, or ambiguous mappings
   yield INDETERMINATE under CAID and MUST fail a required MATCH.  AEB
   MUST NOT guess equivalence from names, natural-language descriptions,
   trace identifiers, or presenter assertions.

   CAID is conditional machinery for a cross-format join, not a second
   authorization protocol.  MATCH is content correlation only.  It does
   not validate a native artifact and does not authorize execution.

5.4.  Evaluate Required Field-Origin Assertions

   A relying party MAY require a natively verified field-origin
   assertion for selected fields before admission.  This document
   defines the processing contract for that input, not a field-origin
   wire format, origin taxonomy, scanner, or transformation language.

   The boundary MUST verify the assertion under the relying party's
   pinned native verifier, issuer and key, assertion profile and digest,
   action binding, field selectors, accepted origin classes, accepted
   transformation definitions, snapshot policy, freshness bound, and
   status inputs.  The verifier output MUST bind each asserted field to
   the exact observed action or to a lossless, pinned mapping to that
   action.  A profile identifier or origin label carried only by the
   presenter MUST NOT select its own verifier or trust root.

   A verified assertion establishes that the pinned issuer made the
   signed claim.  It does not independently prove source truth, semantic
   correctness, absence of prompt injection, authorization, settlement,
   or the truth of a later physical effect.  If policy requires an
   origin constraint for a material field, a missing assertion, unknown
   or disallowed origin, unpinned transformation, stale or unreliable
   required snapshot, action mismatch, or unavailable required status
   MUST withhold admission.  The boundary MUST preserve the distinction
   between assertion verification and acceptance under local policy.

   A field-origin policy SHOULD be discriminating rather than a blanket
   prohibition on untrusted content.  For example, it can refuse an
   untrusted message that selects a payee or destination while accepting



Schrock                   Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   the same origin class for a bounded non-authoritative memo field.
   The accepted and refused field classes are relying-party policy, not
   universal AEB semantics.

   EP-FIELD-ORIGIN-v0.1 and its finance-operations Gap 6 runner are an
   informative reference implementation profile [EP-FIELD-ORIGIN].  They
   do not become a mandatory AEB format and their same-team results are
   not independent implementation evidence.

5.5.  Evaluate Additional Evidence Requirements When Required

   AEB does not require an AEC evaluation when one native authorization
   result, enforced by the effect-owning PEP, satisfies the relying
   party's complete requirement.  When local policy requires multiple
   evidence legs, the boundary MUST submit only natively verified,
   action-matched evidence to an AEC verifier configured with the
   relying party's requirement.  The requirement used for the decision
   MUST come from relying-party configuration, not from a presenter-
   controlled AEC member.

   Every required evidence role MUST be filled by an artifact whose
   native verifier and adapter are accepted for that role.  A workload
   identity MUST NOT silently fill a policy-permit or human-
   authorization slot.  A machine-policy decision MUST NOT silently fill
   a named-human slot.  A generic operator signature MUST NOT be
   interpreted as evidence that a human operated a system or performed a
   named approval ceremony.

   When AEC is selected, only a successful evaluation under these inputs
   reaches SATISFIED.  UNSATISFIED, malformed, unsupported, or ambiguous
   results MUST withhold invocation.  AEB MUST NOT insert an AEC leg
   merely to re-decide or relabel one native PDP result.

   A qualification statement can fill an evaluation-evidence role only
   when its native verifier establishes the measured candidate,
   evaluation campaign, assignment, policy, freshness, and status.  A
   qualification result MUST NOT fill an authorization role and MUST NOT
   by itself cause SATISFIED, AUTHORIZED, reservation, or invocation.

5.6.  Pinned Boundary Requirement and Evaluation Record

   The consequence-owning relying party MUST pin every adapter revision,
   trust root, mapping profile, evidence requirement, and boundary
   constraint used for a decision.  The presenter MUST NOT select or
   weaken those inputs.  The following EP-AEB-REQUIREMENT-v1 object is
   an optional closed profile for a deployment that selects AEC and
   multiple evidence roles.  It is not required for a single native
   authorization path:



Schrock                   Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   {
     "@version": "EP-AEB-REQUIREMENT-v1",
     "all_of": ["human-authorization", "policy-permit"],
     "terms": [
       { "type": "distinct-human-quorum",
         "role": "human-authorization", "threshold": 2 },
       { "type": "initiator-exclusion",
         "roles": ["human-authorization"] },
       { "type": "executor-exclusion",
         "roles": ["human-authorization"] },
       { "type": "one-time-consumption" }
     ]
   }

   An implementation of this optional object MUST reject unknown terms.
   It MUST require exactly one one-time-consumption term.  A distinct-
   human-quorum term counts only distinct natural-person subject
   identifiers exposed by eligible native verifiers for the named role.
   initiator-exclusion and executor-exclusion compare those verified
   subjects with the boundary-owned initiator and executor identifiers.
   Different encodings of one key or subject MUST NOT count as different
   humans.

   Execution-time evaluation MUST resolve current status through
   relying-party-configured status sources.  Presenter-supplied current
   status is untrusted.  Revoked, expired, stale, unavailable,
   ambiguous, or unauthenticated required status MUST withhold
   authorization.  Historical re-performance MUST be labeled historical
   and MUST NOT be used as a current execution decision.

   The evaluator SHOULD emit a signed, re-derivable record binding the
   observed action and, when selected, its CAID; operation and
   consumption identifiers, initiator and executor, adapter and mapping
   revisions, complete requirement and configuration digests, native
   artifact digests, current-status snapshots, per-leg VERIFIED and
   MATCH results, AEC SATISFIED, boundary constraints, and the separate
   AUTHORIZED or REFUSED verdict, as applicable.  A record that omits a
   conditional CAID or AEC stage MUST identify the native exact-
   operation binding and the reason the extra stage was not selected.
   The record is evidence of the evaluator's decision; it does not
   itself perform or authorize an effect.










Schrock                   Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


5.7.  Make the Local Authorization Decision

   The effect-owning PEP MUST establish AUTHORIZED before AEB custody or
   provider entry.  It can do so by accepting and enforcing the selected
   native authorization result, or by making a separate local decision.
   AEB does not require a second PDP.  If the native path is AuthZEN,
   the AuthZEN PDP decision and the PEP's enforcement of that decision
   remain authoritative under the selected AuthZEN and COAZ profile.

   The PEP MUST apply the exact operation, audience, tenant,
   organization, policy epoch, freshness, current credential and
   authority status, separation-of-duty rules, local risk controls, and
   bounded capability state required by that selected path.  Additional
   local checks MAY narrow a native permit.  They MUST NOT widen it,
   reinterpret a refusal as a permit, or claim that AEB issued the
   native decision.

   Credential revocation and per-action authorization evidence answer
   different questions.  A current non-revocation or status result can
   establish that a credential remains acceptable under local policy; it
   does not prove that the credential holder authorized this action.  A
   per-action authorization artifact does not prove that every
   credential in its trust path remains current.  When policy requires
   both, the boundary MUST verify both without substituting one for the
   other.

   The boundary reaches AUTHORIZED only if the effect-owning PEP accepts
   the exact action at the decision time.  When AEC is selected,
   SATISFIED alone MUST NOT trigger reservation or invocation.

5.8.  Derive a Stable Replay Identity

   Before consuming or reserving authority, the boundary MUST derive a
   stable replay identity from the verified native authorization or from
   the executor-owned exact operation under a relying-party-pinned
   profile.  The same native authority presented in a new wrapper, task,
   session, trace, challenge, or caller retry MUST yield the same replay
   identity.

   The replay identity MUST NOT be derived from a caller-selected retry
   identifier, an AEB wrapper digest, or other mutable context that can
   make the same authority spendable again.  If the selected native
   profile cannot provide or support a stable derivation, the boundary
   MUST refuse provider entry.







Schrock                   Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


5.9.  Atomically Consume or Reserve Before Invocation

   After AUTHORIZED and stable replay derivation, and before provider
   entry, the boundary MUST perform the durable state transition
   required by the native evidence and local policy.  This can include
   consuming a one-time authorization, challenge nonce, or operation
   key; reserving a bounded capability or budget; and fencing the
   operation to one owner across replicas.

   The transition MUST be atomic within the relying party's durable
   state domain.  The operation record MUST bind the stable replay
   identity to the executor-owned observed action or operation
   identifier, never a presenter-selected decoy.  Independently of that
   composite operation record, the store MUST enforce uniqueness or
   conflict detection for every stable native replay identity that the
   selected profile marks as one-time.  Changing an operation identifier
   MUST NOT make the same one-time native authority reservable again.
   If the store is unavailable, non-atomic, stale, or reports an
   ambiguous result, the boundary MUST refuse before invocation.

   AEB does not claim atomicity between a local store and an unrelated
   remote provider.  It requires the local consume or reserve transition
   to occur first so that any uncertainty after dispatch cannot make the
   same authority available for an uncontrolled second effect.

5.10.  Enter the Provider with the Frozen Effect

   An authorized MCP tool call, API request, or other protocol operation
   is not automatically proof that an underlying provider effect was
   authorized or occurred.  When the authorized operation is itself the
   protected provider mutation, the same frozen action can continue
   through this lifecycle.  When an MCP server, API service, or
   intermediary makes a distinct downstream provider request, the
   boundary MUST bind that provider request to the authorized operation
   under the selected native profile or a pinned cross-format mapping.
   It MUST NOT infer that binding from a session, trace, tool name, or
   natural-language description.

   Before any call, message, or byte can reach an effecting component,
   the boundary MUST durably enter DISPATCH_PENDING for the frozen
   observed action that reached AUTHORIZED and CONSUMED or RESERVED.
   The record MUST bind the action digest, operation identifier,
   provider environment, audience, reservation or consumption record,
   and adapter.  Failure or ambiguity while writing this record MUST
   withhold dispatch.






Schrock                   Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   The boundary MUST invoke only from that durable state.  It MUST use a
   stable, action-bound, unique operation identifier or idempotency key
   where the provider supports one.  After dispatch begins, it MUST
   durably record INVOKED or a terminal outcome before reporting success
   to the requester.

   The adapter MUST receive only the authority and evidence necessary
   for the downstream interface.  It MUST NOT accept mutable
   intermediary or caller context that changes a material field after
   the boundary's authorization decision.

5.11.  Classify the Effect Outcome

   After invocation begins, the boundary MUST classify the result as
   EXECUTED, FAILED, or INDETERMINATE.  On restart, a DISPATCH_PENDING
   operation without an authoritative terminal record MUST be promoted
   to INDETERMINATE before any retry or release, because the process
   cannot establish that dispatch did not begin.

   *  EXECUTED requires an authoritative response or accepted native
      execution evidence matched to the exact action, operation
      identifier, provider environment, and audience.

   *  FAILED requires authoritative evidence that the invoked operation
      did not cause the protected effect.  A local parse error,
      exception, timeout, connection loss, process crash, or missing
      response is not by itself such evidence.

   *  INDETERMINATE is REQUIRED whenever invocation may have reached the
      effecting system but the available authoritative evidence does not
      establish EXECUTED or FAILED.

   For EXECUTED, the boundary MUST commit any reserved spend and
   preserve the terminal evidence.  For FAILED, it MUST preserve the
   failure evidence and follow the native reservation policy.  For
   INDETERMINATE, it MUST preserve or consume the reservation, refuse
   reuse of the authorization and operation identifier, and prohibit a
   blind replay.

5.12.  Perform Authenticated Reconciliation

   An INDETERMINATE operation, including one recovered from a stranded
   DISPATCH_PENDING record, MUST remain closed until reconciliation
   authenticates the provider or system of record and matches the result
   to the original action, operation identifier, provider environment,
   audience, target resource, and every application-specific material
   field.




Schrock                   Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   Reconciliation MAY move INDETERMINATE to EXECUTED when authoritative
   evidence establishes that the exact effect occurred.  It MAY move
   INDETERMINATE to FAILED when authoritative evidence establishes that
   it did not occur.  Missing, stale, conflicting, unauthenticated, or
   action-mismatched observations MUST leave the operation
   INDETERMINATE.

   Reconciliation MUST NOT resurrect the original authorization or
   silently release its one-time replay unit.  If policy permits a later
   attempt after an authoritative FAILED result, that attempt MUST use a
   new action instance and complete the lifecycle required by local
   policy.  An implementation MUST NOT invoke again merely because a
   timeout elapsed or because the caller retried.

6.  Declaration and Challenge Semantics

   A deployment MAY publish a static declaration describing protected
   actions, material fields, evidence requirements, challenge methods,
   and effect-boundary placement.  Such a declaration is discovery
   metadata.  It MUST NOT override the relying party's live, local
   enforcement configuration.  An unsupported declaration version MUST
   be ignored as discovery input; it cannot weaken or replace live
   enforcement.  An action that the live boundary configuration cannot
   classify or process under a supported version MUST fail closed.

   When required evidence is absent or unacceptable, a boundary MAY use
   its application protocol to return a dynamic challenge.  A challenge
   MUST identify the boundary-computed action, the missing evidence
   roles, the policy context, an intended audience, a short expiry, and
   a single-use unpredictable nonce or equivalent replay unit.  The
   nonce MUST NOT be consumed merely because untrusted bytes parse.  It
   MUST be consumed atomically only after the selected native verifier
   establishes the integrity and challenge binding of an in-window
   presentation, and before that presentation can reach SATISFIED or
   authorize an effect.  A presentation that is malformed,
   unauthenticated, expired, or not bound to the challenge MUST be
   refused without burning the nonce.  A natively verified, challenge-
   bound presentation consumes the nonce whether or not the remaining
   evidence satisfies the requirement.  Follow-up challenges MUST remain
   bound to the original boundary-computed action and MUST NOT derive
   that action from presenter input.










Schrock                   Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   A declaration or challenge authorizes nothing, reserves nothing, and
   promises no execution.  A satisfied challenge still proceeds through
   native verification, exact-action correspondence, AUTHORIZED, stable
   replay identity, and atomic consumption or reservation.  MATCH and
   SATISFIED also apply when the relying party selects CAID and AEC.
   This document intentionally defines no new manifest object, challenge
   object, well-known URI, HTTP status code, or media type.

7.  Native Evidence and Transport Boundaries

7.1.  WIMSE and HTTP Message Signatures

   WIMSE workload credentials and the WIMSE HTTP Message Signatures
   profile [WIMSE-HTTP] can provide end-to-end workload authentication
   and message integrity for the request components covered by the
   validated signature, including a body protected by a validated
   content digest.  HTTP Message Signatures [RFC9421] provide the
   underlying component-signing mechanism.

   AEB consumes those results; it does not redefine them.  A validated
   WIMSE request can establish which workload possessed the protected
   key and that covered message components were not modified
   undetectably.  It does not by itself establish CAID MATCH, AEC
   SATISFIED, named-human authorization, local AUTHORIZED, one-time
   consumption, or execution.

   The WIMSE AI Identity Management System (AIMS) [WIMSE-AIMS] profiles
   existing identity and authorization standards for agent workloads,
   including OAuth and Transaction Tokens.  The individual draft-munoz-
   wimse-authorization-evidence submission [MUNOZ-WIMSE-EVIDENCE]
   describes an adjacent signed- evidence composition.  AEB begins after
   the selected native identity and authorization path has produced the
   inputs enforced at the effect boundary.  It does not replace their
   issuance, verification, mapping, or authorization semantics.

   PEDIGREE [PEDIGREE] describes native identity and delegation-chain
   evidence.  The AEB result records whether the relying party's stated
   delegation requirement was satisfied by the mapped evidence.  It does
   not reinterpret, re-derive, or override the delegation protocol's
   native decision.  In particular, a PEDIGREE completion block is post-
   effect evidence and MUST NOT fill a pre-action authorization role.










Schrock                   Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   Headers, routing metadata, forwarded identity, trace context, or
   other values that an intermediary can add, remove, or mutate outside
   the validated end-to-end integrity coverage MUST NOT be load-bearing
   authorization evidence.  They MAY be used for routing or diagnostics.
   If such a value affects the protected consequence, the boundary MUST
   derive it independently or require it to be covered by accepted
   native integrity and the observed action's material binding.

7.2.  AuthZEN and COAZ

   The AuthZEN Authorization API [AUTHZEN-API] defines the PDP request
   and decision interface.  COAZ [AUTHZEN-COAZ] defines how an incoming
   protocol operation is projected into the AuthZEN subject, action,
   resource, and context model.  COAZ-MCP [AUTHZEN-COAZ-MCP] applies
   that mapping to MCP operations.  Those specifications remain
   authoritative for operation-to-SARC mapping, PDP evaluation, and PEP
   enforcement.

   AEB does not replace COAZ mapping with CAID and does not require a
   second PDP.  The effect-owning PEP can record AUTHORIZED when it
   accepts an AuthZEN permit for the exact operation under the selected
   COAZ profile.  CAID is needed only if the boundary must compare that
   operation with an independently encoded provider action.  AEC is
   needed only if local policy adds multiple evidence roles beyond the
   native decision.

7.3.  Attested Per-Action Tokens and Permit Records

   OAuth access tokens, Rich Authorization Requests, Transaction Tokens,
   and related artifacts remain native OAuth inputs.  OAuth
   authorization servers retain their OAuth roles; a Transaction Token
   Service retains Transaction Token issuance; and each accepting
   workload or resource retains its native authorization and enforcement
   decision.  Their token, proof-of-possession, audience, and
   transaction semantics are not redefined by AEB.  AEB applies only the
   downstream custody and provider-effect lifecycle selected by the
   effect-owning relying party.

   AP2 mandates [AP2] likewise retain AP2's native verification,
   checkout, transaction-linkage, issuer, holder, and payment semantics.
   An AEB implementation can consume an AP2 result and control one
   covered provider entry without converting the mandate into an AEB
   token or claiming AP2 interoperability.

   Attested per-action tokens, including artifacts described by a
   deployment as OASNT-like, remain native evidence formats.  AEB does
   not assign that descriptive label a token type, claim set, registry
   entry, or trust meaning.  The selected native verifier determines



Schrock                   Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   what the token proves and exposes its integrity-protected action
   commitment, issuer, audience, validity, freshness, status, and
   bounded result to the AEB adapter.

   SCITT Permit records defined by [MUNOZ-PERMIT] likewise remain native
   pre-execution decision evidence.  AEB does not reserialize a Permit
   or convert it into an AEB receipt.  It verifies the selected Permit
   revision through its native adapter, maps its protected material
   action only through a pinned CAID profile, and assigns it only to
   evidence roles permitted by the relying party's AEC requirement.

   A native format's valid signature proves only the statement and
   signer semantics that format defines.  It does not, without an
   additional accepted profile and evidence, prove that a natural person
   operated the workload, understood the action, held authority, or
   performed a particular approval ceremony.

8.  Native Compilation Contract

   An AEB adapter compiles the result of a native verifier into the
   inputs needed by the AEB processing model.  The native artifact,
   verifier, trust model, and result remain authoritative for their own
   semantics.  Compilation MUST NOT convert a native result into an AEB
   credential or permit, and an AEB result MUST NOT overwrite a native
   result.

   The compilation target is the ordered AEB decision and lifecycle
   vocabulary: native verification, exact-action correspondence,
   authorization, stable replay identity, atomic reservation or
   consumption, provider entry, outcome classification, and
   authenticated reconciliation.  CAID matching and AEC satisfaction are
   included only when the relying party selects the corresponding cross-
   format or multi-leg stage.  A successful compile establishes only
   that the native result can be evaluated at those interfaces.  It does
   not establish that the action is authorized, executed, safe, lawful,
   or true.

8.1.  Pinned Inputs

   Before compilation, the relying party MUST pin:

   *  the native protocol, document revision, media type, schema
      version, and verifier revision;

   *  the adapter identifier, adapter revision, verifier implementation
      identifier, and implementation digest;





Schrock                   Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   *  the native trust anchors, issuer and audience policy, clock,
      freshness rules, and required status sources;

   *  when a cross-format join is selected, the exact source descriptor,
      target CAID action type, mapping profile identifier, mapping
      revision, and mapping digest;

   *  when AEC is selected, the accepted evidence role or roles;

   *  the native replay-unit derivation profile and replay scope; and

   *  every native field whose omission or change can affect the
      protected consequence, evidence role, freshness, replay unit, or
      local policy.

   Presented data MAY select among already pinned native variants only
   where the native protocol defines that selection and the relying
   party enables it.  Presented data MUST NOT add or change a trust
   root, verifier, mapping, evidence role, material-field rule, or
   replay scope.

   A verifier implementation identifier and digest are relying-party-
   selected configuration metadata.  They do not prove that a measured
   runtime loaded or executed those bytes.  A compile result MUST keep
   runtime measurement unestablished unless a separate accepted native
   attestation proves it.

8.2.  Deterministic Operations

   An adapter exposes verifyNative, which verifies the artifact under
   the pinned native rules and returns the integrity-protected native
   result and exact operation binding.  When the boundary performs a
   cross-format join, the adapter also exposes the logically separate
   mapAction operation, which maps only a VERIFIED native result to the
   relying party's expected action under the pinned mapping profile.

   Each selected operation MUST be deterministic for the supplied bytes
   and pins.  It MUST NOT perform a network request, consult ambient
   credentials or trust stores, read mutable global state, or accept a
   caller-supplied verification verdict.  Required current status and
   time MUST be explicit relying-party inputs.

   The boundary MUST supply detached, recursively immutable copies of
   the native artifact, expected action, trust inputs, status inputs,
   adapter configuration, and mapping profile.  An adapter MUST NOT
   change a pinned input between native verification and action mapping.





Schrock                   Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


8.3.  Closed Compile Result

   For each native artifact, the compiler MUST return a closed result
   that contains:

   *  the native protocol, exact revision, artifact digest, and native
      verification result;

   *  the adapter identifier, revision, and configuration digest, plus
      the pinned verifier implementation identifier, revision, and
      digest;

   *  when selected, the mapping profile identifier, revision, and
      digest, plus mapper and resolver identifiers and the resolver
      implementation digest;

   *  the source schema or media type and target action type;

   *  the exact relying-party-supplied expected material action value,
      digest, and input provenance;

   *  the CAID and normalized-action digest when a cross-format join is
      selected, or the exact native operation binding otherwise;

   *  when AEC is selected, the accepted evidence role and subject, plus
      the status input and derived freshness result under pinned adapter
      rules;

   *  the stable native replay unit and replay scope;

   *  whether verifier runtime measurement is established;

   *  the semantic-loss report defined below; and

   *  every compiler state that remains unsupported or indeterminate.

   The compile result is typed verifier output.  It is not a bearer
   token, permit, receipt, or proof of execution.  A deployment MAY
   serialize it for diagnostics or evidence transport, but that
   serialization MUST NOT become reusable authority.

   A native profile MAY expose actor, acting-for principal, target,
   declared purpose, audience, constraints, validity, or native
   nonclaims only when its native verifier and pinned mapping establish
   those values.  The generic compiler MUST NOT infer them from a
   subject identifier, policy decision, action label, natural-language
   field, or trace metadata merely to fill a common shape.




Schrock                   Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   A caller-supplied local-policy decision MAY be reported as an
   explicit input, but it MUST NOT establish local authorization.
   Authorization, reservation or consumption, provider entry, outcome,
   and reconciliation remain unestablished until the component that owns
   each transition evaluates and records it.

8.4.  Semantic-Loss Report

   The adapter MUST enumerate every field exposed by the native verifier
   that the selected mapping does not carry into the target action or
   accepted evidence role.  Each omission MUST be classified as
   material, non-material, or unknown under relying-party-pinned rules,
   with a stable field path and declared basis.

   An omitted material or unknown field makes exact-action matching
   INDETERMINATE.  That leg MUST NOT report equivalence, MATCH,
   SATISFIED, or AUTHORIZED.  Renaming, moving, defaulting, unit-
   converting, rounding, truncating, or combining a material field is a
   transformation and requires a pinned deterministic rule.  Natural-
   language similarity, an agent assertion, or a shared trace identifier
   is not such a rule.

   The compiler MAY retain a native mapper's raw relation, CAID, and
   normalized-action digest for diagnostics, but MUST label them as raw
   native output.  They MUST NOT appear as the compiler-effective
   relation after material or unknown loss.  The effective CAID and
   normalized- action digest are absent in that case.

   If two compiled legs produce one CAID but different normalized-
   action digests, the boundary MUST refuse the join.  CAID remains a
   typed content identifier.  It is not an authorization claim or a
   general declaration that two source formats have identical semantics.

8.5.  Stable Native Replay Unit

   Every accepted authorization-bearing native result MUST expose a
   stable native replay unit derived from the verified native authority.
   The replay unit MUST NOT include an AEB wrapper digest, AEB operation
   identifier, consumption nonce, caller retry identifier, or other
   value whose change would make the same native authority spendable
   again.










Schrock                   Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 22]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   The evaluator MUST probe the adapter with a second deterministic
   wrapper reference.  If the replay unit changes while the verified
   native authority does not, the result is INDETERMINATE.  If two
   distinct verified native artifacts from one adapter collapse onto one
   replay unit without the native profile defining that equivalence, the
   result is INDETERMINATE.  A replay-unit value does not prove that
   reservation or consumption occurred.

8.6.  Path and Provider Ownership

   A deployment MUST state whether the AEB boundary controls the
   credential or other capability that reaches the effecting provider,
   which provider-entry paths it mediates, and every direct,
   administrator, break-glass, alternate-protocol, queued, or system-of-
   record path that bypasses it.  An observe-only adapter or an adapter
   placed beside a write path MUST NOT be described as consequence
   admission or complete mediation.

   The compile result MAY record provider-attempt and reconciliation
   bindings only after the corresponding AEB transitions occur.  A
   policy allow, access token, message signature, transparency receipt,
   action record, audit record, or native permit MUST NOT be relabeled
   as proof that provider entry, commitment, or an external effect
   occurred.

8.7.  Compilation Conformance

   A native compilation profile MUST publish exact source locks, at
   least one positive vector containing the original native bytes, and a
   condition-removed control for every negative vector.  Reports MUST
   keep native verification, mapping, AEC, local policy, reservation,
   provider outcome, and reconciliation results separate.

   The profile MUST include hostile vectors for material-field omission
   and substitution, mapping-pin change, stale or unavailable status,
   wrapper replay, alternate-path bypass, refusal-time consumption,
   concurrent admission, timeout after provider entry, blind retry, and
   reconciliation binding mismatch.  It MUST state every native semantic
   that could not be compiled without invention.

   A profile that claims a direct native authorization path MUST show
   the exact native operation binding and stable replay identity without
   inserting a second PDP.  A profile that joins a separately encoded
   provider action MUST exercise the selected CAID mapping, including a
   material-field substitution.  A profile that adds multiple evidence
   roles MUST exercise the selected AEC requirement.  Each report MUST
   say which conditional stages were used and why.




Schrock                   Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 23]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   A generic AEB compiler conformance claim requires at least two
   materially unrelated native profiles to reach the same AEB lifecycle
   without changing their native wire formats or result semantics.  A
   same-team runner is reference evidence, not an independent
   implementation.  Matching a finite vector set does not establish
   complete mediation, production deployment, or provider truth.

9.  Conformance and Deployment Claims

   An implementation conforms to AEB only if every protected invocation
   follows the ordered processing model in Section 5 and fails closed on
   every missing or ambiguous required transition.  A deployment MUST
   state whether CAID or AEC is selected and MUST document:

   *  the protected action types and the effect paths actually mediated;

   *  the trusted configuration and durable-state boundaries;

   *  the native verifier revisions and relying-party pins;

   *  the method used to derive material action fields at the boundary;

   *  the consumption, reservation, and cross-replica fencing mechanism;

   *  the authoritative sources and matching rules used for
      reconciliation; and

   *  all direct, break-glass, administrator, alternate-protocol, and
      system-of-record paths that bypass the AEB implementation.

   An implementation placed beside a write path is not complete
   mediation.  A deployment MUST NOT claim complete mediation unless the
   protected system rejects all material alternate paths or subjects
   them to an equivalent boundary.  Observe-only operation MAY be useful
   during deployment, but it MUST NOT be described as enforcement.

10.  Security Considerations

   *Cross-binding.* An attacker can splice a valid permit, approval,
   credential, or receipt for action A into a request for action B.
   Native verification before mapping, executor-owned action
   construction, and exact correspondence between the authorized
   operation and provider entry are required defenses.  A cross-format
   join also requires exact CAID matching.  A multi-leg requirement also
   requires a relying-party-pinned AEC evaluation.  Omitting a stage
   that the selected profile requires reopens the attack.





Schrock                   Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 24]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   *Mutable context.* Intermediary-added headers and agent annotations
   are convenient but are not trustworthy merely because they arrived on
   an authenticated hop.  Every load-bearing field needs accepted end-
   to-end integrity coverage or independent derivation at the effect
   boundary.

   *Time of check and time of use.* The action passed to the executor
   must be the frozen action that was verified, matched, satisfied,
   authorized, and consumed or reserved.  Mutable aliases, provider
   defaults, exchange rates, destinations, branch heads, and policy
   epochs can change a consequence after approval; profiles must bind or
   revalidate them as material fields.

   *Replay and distributed state.* Process-local caches are insufficient
   where replicas can invoke the same effect.  Replay, consumption,
   reservation, and operation ownership state must be durable, atomic,
   and shared across every boundary instance that can reach the
   protected executor.

   *Freshness and revocation.* Expiration, nonce checks, credential
   status, authority status, and policy epoch are separate checks.  A
   fresh message does not make a revoked credential valid, and a current
   credential does not make old per-action evidence fresh.

   *Indeterminate effects.* Retrying after a timeout can duplicate a
   payment, mutation, disclosure, or physical action.  An invocation
   that might have reached the provider consumes the operation's retry
   right until authenticated reconciliation resolves the exact outcome.
   Caller assurances and unauthenticated webhooks do not resolve it.

   *Signature overclaiming.* A cryptographic signature can establish
   control of a key and integrity of covered content under a selected
   verification profile.  It does not inherently identify a human, prove
   human operation, prove comprehension, establish legal authority, or
   prove execution.

   *Boundary bypass.* A correct AEB implementation does not protect
   direct database credentials, alternate APIs, shell access,
   administrator consoles, side channels, or actuator paths that bypass
   it.  Deployment topology and credential placement are security
   properties, not implementation details.










Schrock                   Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 25]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


11.  Privacy Considerations

   Action objects and evidence can expose identities, destinations,
   resources, policy choices, commercial relationships, and sensitive
   operational timing.  Deployments SHOULD minimize the evidence passed
   to the executor and retained in portable records, use opaque high-
   entropy references where appropriate, and avoid treating a plain
   digest of low-entropy personal data as anonymization.

   Reconciliation queries can disclose that an operation is disputed or
   uncertain.  They SHOULD be authenticated, authorized, rate-limited,
   and limited to the exact operation.  AEB does not require public
   disclosure of native evidence or local policy.

12.  Relationship to EMILIA and Adjacent Work

   CAID [CAID] owns typed material-action identity and exact, relying-
   party-pinned cross-format mapping.  AEB invokes CAID after native
   verification only when independently encoded representations must be
   joined.  It does not extend CAID with trust semantics.

   AEC [AEC] owns heterogeneous evidence composition and the SATISFIED
   or UNSATISFIED result under a relying-party requirement.  AEB invokes
   AEC only when local policy requires multiple evidence legs, then
   preserves the separate authorization and effect-lifecycle decisions.
   The earlier Action Evidence Graph series [AEG] is replaced by AEC; an
   implementation following an older citation MUST NOT treat the
   superseded series as a second composition contract.

   AIMS, OAuth, AuthZEN, COAZ, and AP2 own their respective identity,
   delegation, authorization, protocol mapping, mandate, and native
   enforcement semantics.  AEB is a post-permit consequence-admission
   lifecycle at a covered effect boundary.  It does not create a
   parallel identity system, authorization server, PDP, mandate, or
   universal token.

   Authorization Receipts [RECEIPTS] define one native action-bound
   organizational approval artifact and its receipt-specific consumption
   semantics.  AEB does not make that format mandatory and does not
   generalize every native artifact into an EMILIA receipt.

   Static declarations and dynamic evidence challenges remain distinct
   protocol surfaces.  A manifest can advertise discovery metadata,
   while an Authorization Evidence Challenge can carry the live, action-
   bound refusal and acquisition instructions.  AEB owns the executor
   lifecycle in which those inputs are evaluated; it does not absorb or
   replace their wire formats.




Schrock                   Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 26]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   Qualification, revocation, remedy, and action-to-outcome continuity
   artifacts are optional native inputs or downstream records.  They
   retain their own semantics.  AEB composes them only through pinned
   verification, exact-action binding, local policy, durable custody,
   and authenticated reconciliation.

   A refusal MAY be represented by an action-bound signed refusal
   statement.  The refusal artifact records what the boundary refused
   and why; it MUST NOT be interpreted as proof that every bypass path
   was mediated, that delivery to a requester occurred, or that a later
   action was refused.

13.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.  In particular, it creates no
   registry for native evidence types, lifecycle labels, verifier
   adapters, action mappings, or policy identifiers.

14.  Changes since -05

   This revision positions AEB explicitly after native identity and
   authorization systems.  It makes CAID conditional on a cross-format
   join and AEC conditional on a multi-leg evidence requirement.  It
   states that an effect-owning PEP can accept a native authorization
   result without a second PDP; AuthZEN and COAZ retain ownership of
   SARC mapping, PDP evaluation, and PEP enforcement.  It distinguishes
   an authorized MCP or API request from a downstream provider effect
   and makes the post-permit sequence explicit: stable replay identity,
   durable consume or reserve, provider entry, terminal or indeterminate
   outcome, and authenticated reconciliation without blind retry.  It
   updates the former KLRC reference to the WIMSE AIMS working-group
   document and adds informative AuthZEN, COAZ, COAZ-MCP, and AP2
   references.  The revision creates no credential, permit, receipt,
   registry, policy language, PDP, or universal token.

15.  Implementation Status

   The Apache-2.0 reference implementation provides relying-party-pinned
   adapter and mapping registries, multi-leg CAID joins, the boundary
   terms defined above, current-status verification, signed
   configuration-bound evaluation records, durable ownership-fenced one-
   time consumption, execution reservation and reconciliation, and
   signed refusal statements.  It also exposes a closed native-compiler
   report over the adapter contract, an AuthZEN-derived local PEP-
   observation profile, a source-pinned OAuth Transaction Authorization
   Challenge profile [OAUTH-TXN-CHALLENGE], a strict request-only
   profile over WPT-02 [WIMSE-WPT] and Transaction Tokens -11
   [OAUTH-TXN-TOKENS], and a WIMSE R10 compatibility matrix.  All three



Schrock                   Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 27]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   paths pass locally.  The AuthZEN-derived path verifies an EMILIA-
   signed local PEP observation, not an artifact defined or signed by
   AuthZEN.  It therefore does not count toward the two-external-native-
   profile gate.  OAuth transaction challenge and WPT plus Transaction
   Tokens are the two direct external-native candidates.  Their mappings
   have not been reviewed by the native protocol owners, the published
   profiles still need an audited match against every required hostile
   vector and paired control, and their OAuth adjacency requires an
   explicit protocol-diversity judgment before the generic gate can
   close.  The result is not an independent implementation or an
   adoption claim.  The informative EP-FIELD-ORIGIN-v0.1 profile is
   evaluated before admission in the reference Gate.  Its Gap 6
   implementation profile has 14 deterministic cases, including
   disallowed field origins, unknown origin, profile substitution, an
   unpinned transformation, and the positive case in which untrusted
   content supplies only a bounded memo field.  Conformance vectors and
   adversarial tests cover selected reference paths; the full
   conformance set above remains future conformance work and is not
   established by this revision.  These same-team artifacts are not an
   independent implementation and do not prove that a deployment
   mediates every effect path.

16.  References

16.1.  Normative References

   [AEC]      Schrock, I., "Authorization Evidence Chains: Composing
              Heterogeneous Agent-Action Evidence (EP-AEC)", Work in
              Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-schrock-ep-authorization-
              evidence-chain-05, July 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-schrock-ep-
              authorization-evidence-chain/>.

   [BCP14]    Internet Engineering Task Force, "Key Words for Use in
              RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels", BCP 14, 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp14>.

   [CAID]     Schrock, I., "The Canonical Action Identifier (CAID)",
              Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-schrock-canonical-
              action-identifier-02, 9 August 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-schrock-canonical-
              action-identifier/>.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.




Schrock                   Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 28]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

16.2.  Informative References

   [AEG]      Schrock, I., "Action Evidence Graph for Consequential
              Agent Actions", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-
              schrock-ep-action-evidence-graph-00, July 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-schrock-ep-action-
              evidence-graph/>.

   [AP2]      Google Agentic Commerce, "Agent Payments Protocol (AP2),
              v0.2 CheckoutMandate and PaymentMandate", 2026,
              <https://github.com/google-agentic-commerce/AP2/tree/
              e1ea56db72a6385bce3e5c1112b3a56ce60acb43>.

   [AUTHZEN-API]
              Gazitt, O., Brossard, D., and A. Tulshibagwale,
              "Authorization API 1.0", OpenID AuthZEN Final
              Specification, 11 January 2026,
              <https://openid.net/specs/authorization-api-1_0.html>.

   [AUTHZEN-COAZ]
              Olivier, A. and A. Tulshibagwale, "COAZ: A Framework for
              Mapping Information Models to AuthZEN Authorization
              Requests - Draft 1", OpenID AuthZEN Working Group Draft 1,
              13 February 2026, <https://openid.github.io/authzen/
              authzen-coaz-framework-1_0.html>.

   [AUTHZEN-COAZ-MCP]
              Tulshibagwale, A. and A. Olivier, "COAZ-MCP: COAZ Binding
              for the Model Context Protocol - Draft 1", OpenID AuthZEN
              Working Group Draft 1, 13 February 2026,
              <https://openid.github.io/authzen/authzen-coaz-mcp-
              binding-1_0.html>.

   [EP-FIELD-ORIGIN]
              EMILIA Protocol, "EP-FIELD-ORIGIN-v0.1 Informative
              Implementation Profile and Gap 6 Runner", 15 August 2026,
              <https://github.com/emiliaprotocol/emilia-
              protocol/tree/71358caf0c4d2459958efbbdda3530a0e02889e5/
              conformance/composition/gap6-execution-evidence-v0.1>.








Schrock                   Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 29]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   [MUNOZ-PERMIT]
              Munoz, C., "A SCITT Profile for Pre-Execution AI Action
              Authorization Records", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft,
              draft-munoz-scitt-permit-profile-01, July 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-munoz-scitt-
              permit-profile/>.

   [MUNOZ-WIMSE-EVIDENCE]
              Munoz, C., "Signed Authorization-Evidence Records for
              WIMSE-Authorized AI Agent Actions", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-munoz-wimse-authorization-evidence-
              01, July 2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-
              munoz-wimse-authorization-evidence/>.

   [OAUTH-TXN-CHALLENGE]
              Rosomakho, Y., Campbell, B., McGuinness, K., and P.
              Kasselman, "OAuth Transaction Authorization Challenge",
              Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-rosomakho-oauth-
              txn-challenge-00, 25 June 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-rosomakho-oauth-
              txn-challenge/>.

   [OAUTH-TXN-TOKENS]
              Tulshibagwale, A., Fletcher, G., and P. Kasselman,
              "Transaction Tokens", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft,
              draft-ietf-oauth-transaction-tokens-11, 30 July 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-oauth-
              transaction-tokens/>.

   [PEDIGREE] Rampalli, K., "PEDIGREE: Verifiable Delegation Identity
              for Agentic AI Systems", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft,
              draft-rampalli-pedigree-00, April 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-rampalli-
              pedigree/>.

   [RECEIPTS] Schrock, I., "Authorization Receipts for High-Risk Agent
              Actions", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-schrock-
              ep-authorization-receipts-12, 16 August 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-schrock-ep-
              authorization-receipts/>.

   [RFC9421]  Backman, A., Ed., Richer, J., Ed., and M. Sporny, "HTTP
              Message Signatures", RFC 9421, DOI 10.17487/RFC9421,
              February 2024, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9421>.

   [WIMSE-AIMS]
              Kasselman, P., Lombardo, J., Rosomakho, Y., Campbell, B.,
              Steele, N., and A. Parecki, "AI Identity Management



Schrock                   Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 30]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


              System", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-
              wimse-aims-00, 15 September 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-wimse-aims/>.

   [WIMSE-HTTP]
              Salowey, J. and Y. Sheffer, "WIMSE Workload-to-Workload
              Authentication with HTTP Signatures", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-wimse-http-signature-06, 4
              August 2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-
              wimse-http-signature/>.

   [WIMSE-WPT]
              Campbell, B. and A. Schwenkschuster, "WIMSE Workload Proof
              Token", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-
              wimse-wpt-02, 27 August 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-wimse-wpt/>.

Appendix A.  Acknowledgments

   External review sharpened the boundaries between workload and message
   integrity, per-action authorization evidence, credential status,
   human operation, and executor-owned effect control.  Those
   distinctions are load-bearing in this document.  Acknowledgment does
   not imply endorsement.

Author's Address

   Iman Schrock
   EMILIA Protocol, Inc.
   United States of America
   Email: team@emiliaprotocol.ai




















Schrock                   Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 31]
