



Network Working Group                                         I. Schrock
Internet-Draft                                     EMILIA Protocol, Inc.
Intended status: Experimental                               19 July 2026
Expires: 20 January 2027


Bounded Capability Receipts and Durable Spend Control for Agent Actions
            draft-schrock-ep-bounded-capability-receipts-00

Abstract

   Agents sometimes need bounded authority to perform more than one
   consequential action without obtaining a new human approval for every
   operation.  A signed token alone cannot enforce a shared budget
   across replicas, survive retries safely, or distinguish an operation
   that never crossed an effect boundary from one whose outcome is
   unknown.

   This document defines a bounded capability receipt and a durable
   reserve-execute-commit protocol.  The receipt binds an issuance
   authorization, a closed action scope, a budget with explicit units, a
   holder proof, an expiry, and any parent capability.  The state
   protocol atomically refuses overspend and replay, fences concurrent
   owners, and charges an indeterminate operation when an external
   effect may have occurred.  It also defines narrowing-only delegation
   and evidence interfaces.  It does not make a bearer token into human
   approval, does not provide offline global double-spend prevention,
   and does not claim that an authorized action was safe, lawful, or
   successfully executed.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 20 January 2027.





Schrock                  Expires 20 January 2027                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities               July 2026


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.1.  Requirements Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.2.  Scope and Non-Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  Trust Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  The Bounded Capability Receipt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     4.1.  Required Fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     4.2.  Signature Input and Receipt Digest  . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     4.3.  Receipt Verification  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   5.  Issuance Authorization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   6.  Action Scope  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   7.  Holder Proof and Threshold Custody  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   8.  Registration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   9.  Reserve, Execute, and Commit  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     9.1.  Reserve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     9.2.  Effect Boundary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     9.3.  Commit  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     9.4.  Crash Recovery and Reconciliation . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   10. Narrowing Delegation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   11. Evidence and Decision Vocabulary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   12. Failure Codes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   13. Conformance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   14. Relationship to Other Work  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   15. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   16. Privacy Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   17. Implementation Status . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   18. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   19. Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   20. Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18





Schrock                  Expires 20 January 2027                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities               July 2026


1.  Introduction

   A single-action authorization receipt is intentionally narrow: it
   records approval of one exact action and can be accepted at most once
   within its atomic consumption domain.  Some agent deployments also
   need a different primitive.  For example, an operator may authorize
   an agent to purchase a bounded class of supplies, subject to an
   aggregate monetary ceiling and an expiry, without asking a human to
   approve each conforming purchase.

   That primitive has two inseparable parts:

   1.  a signed capability receipt that states the immutable authority
       boundary; and

   2.  a shared, durable state machine that serializes reservations and
       committed consumption across retries, processes, replicas, and
       restarts.

   The signed object without the state machine is replayable budget
   metadata.  The state machine without a signed, scoped grant has no
   portable statement of authority.  This document specifies their
   composition.

1.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

1.2.  Scope and Non-Goals

   This document defines issuance binding, action-scope evaluation,
   budget accounting, holder proof, durable reservation and commitment,
   and narrowing delegation.  It does not define user authentication,
   human-approval presentation, general policy syntax, payment clearing,
   settlement, currency conversion, revocation distribution, or the
   external effect adapter.

   A capability receipt is machine authority evidence.  It is not,
   merely by being signed, evidence that a human reviewed each later
   action.  Deployments that require per-action human authorization
   continue to require a per-action authorization artifact.






Schrock                  Expires 20 January 2027                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities               July 2026


2.  Terminology

   Issuance authorization:  An independently verified authorization
      artifact for the exact act of creating a bounded capability.

   Capability receipt:  The signed immutable grant defined by this
      document.

   Capability issuer:  The principal whose pinned key signs a capability
      receipt.

   Holder proof:  Proof that the requester controls the secret or key
      named by the capability receipt.  Holder proof is not proof that a
      requested action is in scope.

   Scope verifier:  A verifier for a named scope profile, selected and
      configured by the relying party.

   Capability store:  The authoritative shared transactional state for
      registration, reservation, and committed consumption.

   Operation ID:  A globally unique identifier for one attempted
      capability-funded operation within a capability-store domain.

   Reservation token:  An unguessable owner-fencing value returned by a
      successful reservation and required for its commitment.

   Effect boundary:  The point after which an external effect may have
      occurred and therefore budget cannot safely be restored merely
      because the caller did not receive a successful response.

   Indeterminate outcome:  An operation for which the executor cannot
      prove that no effect occurred and cannot prove a successful
      expected effect.

3.  Trust Model

   The relying party selects capability-issuer keys, accepted issuance
   authorization profiles, scope profiles, state-store domain, and local
   authorization policy.  A key embedded in a presented capability
   receipt MUST NOT, by itself, become a trust anchor.  An empty trust
   configuration MUST fail closed.

   The capability store is trusted to serialize state transitions and
   retain committed operation records.  The effect adapter is trusted to
   place the effect boundary correctly and to report outcomes honestly.
   This protocol makes those trust dependencies explicit; it does not
   remove them.



Schrock                  Expires 20 January 2027                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities               July 2026


   All capability-store participants that can authorize the same
   capability MUST use one shared atomic state domain.  Independent
   stores cannot prevent each other from accepting the same remaining
   budget.

4.  The Bounded Capability Receipt

   The receipt is a JSON object serialized using the JSON
   Canonicalization Scheme (JCS) [RFC8785] before signing.  The
   following is illustrative:

   {
     "@version": "EP-BOUNDED-CAPABILITY-v1",
     "capability": {
       "capability_id": "cap_01J...",
       "issuer": "https://operator.example",
       "subject": "agent:procurement-7",
       "authorization": {
         "receipt_id": "rcpt_01J...",
         "receipt_digest": "sha256:4c..."
       },
       "scope": {
         "profile": "urn:emilia:scope:caid-set-v1",
         "value": {
           "caids": ["caid1:sha256:..."]
         },
         "digest": "sha256:8a..."
       },
       "budget": {
         "amount": 250000,
         "unit": "iso4217:USD",
         "scale": 2
       },
       "holder": {
         "method": "sha-256-preimage",
         "commitment": "sha256:91..."
       },
       "threshold": {"m": 2, "n": 3},
       "parent": null,
       "not_before": "2026-07-18T20:00:00Z",
       "expires_at": "2026-07-19T20:00:00Z"
     },
     "capability_signature": {
       "algorithm": "Ed25519",
       "public_key": "base64url...",
       "value": "base64url..."
     }
   }



Schrock                  Expires 20 January 2027                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities               July 2026


4.1.  Required Fields

   @version:  EP-BOUNDED-CAPABILITY-v1.

   capability_id:  A globally unique, opaque identifier.  Uniqueness is
      not used as a substitute for cryptographic binding.

   issuer:  The issuer identifier used to select a relying-party-pinned
      verification key.

   subject:  The intended holder or workload identifier.  This
      identifier does not replace holder proof or live workload
      authentication.

   authorization:  The identifier and SHA-256 digest of the complete
      issuance authorization artifact.  The digest MUST cover the exact
      bytes accepted by that artifact's native verifier.

   scope:  A named scope profile, its value, and the SHA-256 digest of
      the JCS serialization of profile and value.

   budget:  A non-negative integer amount no greater than
      9007199254740991, an explicit unit, and a decimal scale from 0
      through 18.  For iso4217:USD with scale 2, an amount of 250000
      denotes USD 2500.00.  Implementations MUST NOT infer a scale from
      display conventions.

   holder:  A recognized holder-proof method and commitment.

   threshold:  Integers m and n satisfying 1 <= m <= n <= 255.  This
      field describes custody of the holder credential; it does not
      assert approval by distinct humans.

   parent:  null for a root capability.  For a child capability, an
      object containing the parent capability ID, the digest of the
      complete signed parent receipt, and the identifier of an
      authenticated parent delegation operation.  That operation MUST
      bind the child receipt digest and the delegated amount, unit,
      scale, scope, and validity interval.  A parent identifier without
      digest-bound parent and delegation evidence is insufficient.

   not_before and expires_at:  UTC timestamps in Internet Date/Time
      format [RFC3339] using the canonical string form selected by the
      deployment profile.  Expiry is exclusive.  Numeric epochs,
      implementation-specific date strings, and values that do not
      round-trip to the canonical form MUST be rejected.





Schrock                  Expires 20 January 2027                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities               July 2026


4.2.  Signature Input and Receipt Digest

   The issuer signature input is the JCS serialization of the object
   containing exactly @version and capability.  The signature algorithm
   for this version is Ed25519 [RFC8032].  The receipt digest is:

   SHA-256(JCS({
     "@version": receipt["@version"],
     "capability": receipt.capability,
     "capability_signature": receipt.capability_signature
   }))

   The issuance authorization is bound by both its identifier and
   digest.  Binding only a caller-selected receipt identifier is
   insufficient because two different artifacts can carry the same
   identifier.

4.3.  Receipt Verification

   A verifier MUST perform all of the following and fail closed on any
   error:

   1.  apply bounded parsing and reject duplicate JSON member names,
       unknown critical versions, malformed encodings, and out-of-range
       values;

   2.  select the issuer key from relying-party configuration, not from
       the presented object alone;

   3.  verify the issuer signature over the exact signature input;

   4.  natively verify the issuance authorization under its own pinned
       trust inputs and compare both receipt identifier and digest;

   5.  verify that the authorized action is issuance of this exact
       capability object, or of a digest that commits to it;

   6.  verify the scope digest and require a recognized, relying-party-
       enabled scope profile;












Schrock                  Expires 20 January 2027                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities               July 2026


   7.  verify the validity interval and, for a child, resolve and verify
       the digest-bound parent lineage to a root capability or a locally
       trusted, previously validated lineage checkpoint.  Reject an
       unresolved, truncated, reordered, or substituted link; a repeated
       capability ID or receipt digest; the leaf appearing among its
       ancestors; or a path exceeding deployment policy.  At every hop,
       verify that the child amount does not exceed the authenticated
       delegated amount, unit and scale are unchanged, validity is
       contained by the parent, and scope is no broader than the parent
       scope; and

   8.  compute the capability receipt digest used for store
       registration.

   Receipt verification returns VERIFIED.  It does not return
   AUTHORIZED, prove remaining budget, or prove that a proposed
   operation is in scope.

5.  Issuance Authorization

   The issuance authorization MUST authorize the act of creating the
   capability, including the immutable digest of its subject, scope,
   budget, holder commitment, parent, and validity interval.  It MUST
   NOT be reused as though it were a per-operation authorization for
   later spends.

   When the issuance artifact is an EMILIA Authorization Receipt, its
   exact action is capability issuance and its one-time consumption
   occurs when the capability is registered.  Later capability-funded
   operations are governed by this document's scope and durable state
   protocol.

6.  Action Scope

   Before reserving budget, the enforcement point MUST compute the
   proposed material action independently of presenter-supplied labels
   and invoke the pinned verifier for scope.profile.  A missing profile,
   unknown action representation, lossy mapping, or indeterminate
   comparison MUST refuse.

   The mandatory-to-implement urn:emilia:scope:caid-set-v1 profile
   contains a non-empty, duplicate-free array of Canonical Action
   IDentifiers.  It matches only exact identifier equality.  Possession
   of a CAID authorizes nothing outside this verified capability
   context.






Schrock                  Expires 20 January 2027                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities               July 2026


   Application profiles can define closed constraints over typed action
   fields.  Such a profile MUST specify canonicalization, comparison,
   unknown-field handling, numerical units, and an algorithm for proving
   that a delegated scope is no broader than its parent.  Profiles that
   cannot decide either action membership or attenuation MUST return
   INDETERMINATE.

7.  Holder Proof and Threshold Custody

   The mandatory-to-implement holder method is sha-256-preimage.  The
   holder presents exactly 32 bytes over a confidential, integrity-
   protected channel, and the enforcement point compares SHA-
   256(preimage) with the signed commitment using a constant-time
   comparison.  The preimage MUST NOT be logged, stored with the
   receipt, or included in portable evidence.

   The preimage may be divided using a threshold secret-sharing scheme
   before presentation.  Share format, participant authentication,
   confidentiality, recovery, and distribution are outside this
   document.  Reconstructing m shares proves control of the holder
   secret; it does not prove that m distinct humans reviewed or approved
   the action.  Human multi-party approval requires a protocol such as
   [EP-QUORUM].

8.  Registration

   After receipt verification and one-time consumption of the issuance
   authorization, the issuer registers the capability in the
   authoritative store.  Registration MUST atomically create immutable
   fields for capability ID, receipt digest, unit, scale, total budget,
   scope digest, validity interval, and parent.  It MUST initialize
   consumed and reserved to zero.

   A second registration of the same capability ID MUST succeed only
   when every immutable field and receipt digest is identical.  Any
   mismatch is a collision and MUST refuse.

   Mutable counters in a presented receipt are not authoritative.
   Remaining budget is computed only from the shared store:

   remaining = total - consumed - reserved

9.  Reserve, Execute, and Commit








Schrock                  Expires 20 January 2027                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities               July 2026


9.1.  Reserve

   A reservation request contains the capability ID, capability receipt
   digest, globally unique operation ID, the immutable canonical
   exercise-action digest and CAID where used, positive integer amount,
   unit, scale, and authenticated holder proof.  The same immutable
   action snapshot MUST be used for scope evaluation, authorization,
   reservation accounting, and the effect callback; a mutable caller
   object MUST NOT cross those boundaries.  In one serializable
   transaction, or while holding an equivalent row lock, the store MUST:

   1.  load the registered capability and compare the receipt digest;

   2.  reject an unknown, not-yet-valid, expired, or revoked capability;

   3.  reject a unit or scale mismatch;

   4.  reject any already-seen operation ID, regardless of its previous
       capability or outcome;

   5.  verify that the amount is positive and no greater than total -
       consumed - reserved;

   6.  increase reserved by the amount; and

   7.  create an operation in state reserved with an unguessable
       reservation token, exercise-action digest, and amount, and return
       that token only to the owner.

   Scope evaluation and local authorization policy MUST succeed before
   the effect adapter is entered.  Deployments SHOULD perform them
   before reserving to reduce abandoned reservations.

9.2.  Effect Boundary

   The enforcement point enters the effect adapter only after a
   successful reservation.  It MUST NOT expose an alternate path to the
   same effect that bypasses capability enforcement when the action
   requires this profile.

9.3.  Commit

   A commit request contains the operation ID, reservation token, and
   one of three outcomes: executed, indeterminate, or delegated.  In one
   atomic transaction, the store MUST verify ownership and reserved
   state, decrease reserved, increase consumed by the same amount, and
   make the operation terminal.




Schrock                  Expires 20 January 2027               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities               July 2026


   A repeated commit, wrong reservation token, or commit against a non-
   reserved operation MUST refuse.  A caller timeout does not justify
   retrying with a new operation ID; the caller MUST query the original
   operation or reconcile it.

   If the executor cannot prove that the effect boundary was not
   crossed, it MUST commit indeterminate and charge the budget.
   Availability loss is safer than allowing the same authority to be
   spent again after an unobserved external effect.

9.4.  Crash Recovery and Reconciliation

   Reservations survive process and replica failure.  A deployment MUST
   define a reconciler for non-terminal operations.  The reconciler may
   commit executed only with authenticated effect evidence.  It may
   restore budget only when it can prove the effect boundary was never
   crossed.  In every other case it MUST commit indeterminate.

10.  Narrowing Delegation

   A child capability MUST NOT outlive its parent, exceed the
   authenticated amount delegated from the parent, change unit or scale,
   or broaden the parent's scope.  Its delegation chain MUST be bounded
   by deployment policy and MUST include the parent receipt digest.

   Before registering a child, the verifier MUST validate complete
   digest-linked ancestry to a trusted root within the configured depth
   bound, or enforce equivalent authenticated parent-edge constraints in
   one authoritative store.  The verified lineage MUST form a simple
   path.  The verifier MUST reject a repeated capability identifier or
   receipt digest, a missing or inconsistent parent, a substituted or
   reordered edge, or a chain whose trusted root cannot be established.
   A cycle, truncated lineage, or over-depth chain MUST fail closed.
   Per-receipt identifier uniqueness or a self-declared list of
   ancestors does not establish graph-wide acyclicity.  An
   implementation MUST NOT infer acyclicity merely because its ordinary
   issuance path constructs children from known parents; verification
   applies the same check to imported and reconstructed chains.













Schrock                  Expires 20 January 2027               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities               July 2026


   Creating a child is itself a parent-funded operation.  The issuer
   reserves and commits the delegated amount from the parent with
   outcome delegated.  The authenticated terminal operation record MUST
   bind the exact child receipt digest, delegated amount, unit, scale,
   scope, and validity interval before the child is registered;
   otherwise a valid parent spend could be paired with a different
   child.  A shared store SHOULD perform parent commitment and child
   registration atomically.  If that is impossible and child
   registration fails after the parent is committed, the parent budget
   remains consumed and the orphaned delegation MUST be retained for
   reconciliation.  The system MUST NOT silently refund it.

11.  Evidence and Decision Vocabulary

   A capability receipt can be VERIFIED.  A scope verifier can return
   the profile-local result IN_SCOPE, OUT_OF_SCOPE, or INDETERMINATE.
   This containment result is not the architecture's MATCH state, which
   is reserved for correlation of exact material actions.  A relying-
   party evidence requirement can be SATISFIED.  Successful local policy
   and an atomic reservation together can establish AUTHORIZED for one
   exercise.  Separately authenticated effect evidence can establish
   EXECUTED.  No earlier state implies a later one.

   Portable evidence for a capability-funded operation SHOULD include
   the capability receipt digest, issuance authorization digest, scope
   profile and digest, operation ID, the exact exercise action digest
   and CAID where used, amount, unit, scale, reservation timestamp,
   terminal outcome, and any authenticated effect statement.  The
   integrity-protected operation record MUST bind the exercise action
   and the capability receipt digest.  Holder secrets and reservation
   tokens MUST NOT be included.

   An Authorization Evidence Chain may carry that operation record as a
   native component whose verifier recursively verifies the capability
   receipt, issuance authorization, scope result, and operation-record
   integrity.  The static grant is not a same-action component for every
   later exercise.  Evidence satisfaction does not query or reserve
   current budget; that state transition remains at the enforcement
   point.

12.  Failure Codes

   Implementations SHOULD expose stable, non-authorizing failure codes
   including:

   *  capability_untrusted_issuer

   *  capability_authorization_mismatch



Schrock                  Expires 20 January 2027               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities               July 2026


   *  capability_scope_mismatch

   *  capability_scope_indeterminate

   *  capability_holder_proof_invalid

   *  capability_not_active

   *  capability_expired

   *  capability_revoked

   *  capability_budget_exceeded

   *  capability_delegation_lineage_invalid

   *  capability_delegation_not_narrowed

   *  capability_operation_replay

   *  capability_reservation_owner_mismatch

   *  capability_commit_indeterminate

   A failure code is diagnostic output, not an authorization artifact.
   Responses SHOULD avoid revealing secret, budget, or scope details to
   an unauthenticated caller.

13.  Conformance

   A conforming implementation MUST pass positive and adversarial
   vectors for receipt canonicalization and signature, authorization-
   digest substitution, untrusted issuer, unknown scope profile, action
   mismatch, holder-proof failure, duplicate registration, concurrent
   overspend, operation replay, wrong reservation token, double commit,
   expiry, a cycle spread across separately signed receipts, repeated
   ancestors, leaf-as-ancestor, missing or truncated lineage, reordered
   or substituted parent links, parent-receipt and delegation-operation
   substitution, a single-hop child exceeding the authenticated
   delegated amount, unit or scale changes, scope or validity widening
   at every hop, over-depth chains, parent over-allocation, crash
   recovery, and indeterminate-effect charging.

   A wire-format implementation that does not implement one shared
   atomic store is a receipt verifier, not a conforming spend-control
   implementation.  A store implementation that accepts a capability
   without pinned issuer verification, issuance authorization, and scope
   matching is not conforming.



Schrock                  Expires 20 January 2027               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities               July 2026


14.  Relationship to Other Work

   Rich Authorization Requests [RFC9396] carries fine-grained
   authorization details but deliberately leaves comparison semantics
   for arbitrary detail types to their specifications.  This document
   defines an executor-side durable spend state machine and requires a
   named closed scope profile.

   OAuth Transaction Tokens [TXN-TOKENS] propagate transaction-specific
   authorization context through a call chain.  Bounded Capability
   Receipts instead address an aggregate budget shared across multiple
   operations and the reserve/commit boundary at the executor.  A
   deployment can use both.

   The Delegation Receipt Protocol [DRP] records delegation and
   narrowing.  This document requires narrowing for child capabilities
   and additionally accounts delegated budget as a terminal parent
   spend.

   OAuth Attenuating Tokens for Agentic AI [ATTENUATING] describes
   constrained, attenuable agent tokens.  This document's distinct
   contribution is not the existence of constrained tokens; it is the
   composition of a signed grant with shared reservation ownership,
   committed budget accounting, and conservative treatment of
   indeterminate external effects.

15.  Security Considerations

   *Identifier substitution.* Capability signatures bind the full
   issuance authorization digest, not only an identifier.  Scope, budget
   units, parent, holder commitment, and validity are all inside the
   issuer signature.

   *State forks.* Two stores accepting the same capability can each
   spend its full budget.  Global offline double-spend prevention is
   therefore not provided.  Deployments that cannot name one
   authoritative state domain MUST NOT claim an aggregate budget is
   enforced.

   *Crash ambiguity.* Restoring budget after a timeout can authorize
   duplicate external effects.  Once the effect boundary may have been
   crossed, uncertainty is charged as indeterminate.

   *Bearer and share theft.* A raw holder secret or enough
   unauthenticated shares can authorize possession.  Secret shares
   require confidential distribution, authenticated participants,
   compromise response, and rate limiting.  Threshold custody is not
   human quorum.



Schrock                  Expires 20 January 2027               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities               July 2026


   *Revocation.* Expiry and exhausted budget are not revocation.  A
   deployment that requires early invalidation MUST consult a separately
   authenticated revocation or status source before reservation and
   define its freshness policy.

   *Units and arithmetic.* All accounting uses integers with signed unit
   and scale.  Floating-point arithmetic, implicit currency conversion,
   and caller-selected rounding MUST NOT occur in the authoritative
   budget path.

   *Database authority.* The capability tables contain authorization
   state.  Deployments MUST restrict writes to the enforcement service,
   use least-privilege credentials, protect backups, and audit
   administrative changes.

   *Delegation lineage.* Local uniqueness checks over one presented
   receipt do not establish graph-wide acyclicity or complete ancestry.
   Separately presented receipts can omit links, substitute a parent
   operation, or form a cycle unless each parent edge is authenticated
   and resolved by digest, or an authoritative store enforces equivalent
   edge constraints.  Implementations MUST fail closed on incomplete,
   cyclic, substituted, or non-narrowing lineage.  Verifiers apply the
   complete traversal and refusal rules in Section 10 to imported chains
   and chains reconstructed from storage.

   *Semantic limits.* A valid capability does not prove that an action
   is safe, lawful, beneficial, or correctly executed.  Local policy and
   domain controls remain necessary.

   *Cryptographic scope.* This version uses SHA-256 and Ed25519.  It
   does not provide a post-quantum signature profile or a zero-knowledge
   receipt.  Algorithm agility and long-term preservation are separate
   concerns.

16.  Privacy Considerations

   Capability receipts and operation records can reveal spending limits,
   organizational roles, intended action classes, counterparties, and
   timing.  Profiles SHOULD minimize identifiers, separate portable
   evidence from operational secrets, and define retention and access
   controls.  Hashing a low-entropy scope or identifier does not make it
   confidential.









Schrock                  Expires 20 January 2027               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities               July 2026


17.  Implementation Status

   The main branch of an Apache-2.0 JavaScript implementation includes a
   signed pre-standard capability envelope, holder-secret commitment,
   optional threshold secret reconstruction, and a durable PostgreSQL
   reservation and commitment store.  Its issuer-controlled delegation
   API, when used with one shared capability store, reserves and commits
   a child amount from the immediate parent before registering the
   child.  The store has adversarial tests for overspend, replay,
   ownership fencing, expiry, and terminal commitment.  Production Gate
   guard-path enforcement using this store remains on a public review
   branch and is not represented as part of the repository's main
   branch.

   The prototype wire format predates this document and does not yet
   implement all mandatory fields in this version, including full
   issuance authorization digest binding, an explicit action-scope
   profile, and explicit budget unit scale, digest-linked parent
   lineage, authenticated parent-delegation binding, not_before, and
   complete ingest-time cycle validation.  It is therefore
   implementation experience, not a claim of conformance.  There is no
   independent implementation, interoperability event, production
   transaction history, post-quantum profile, or zero-knowledge
   implementation.

   The main implementation does reject repeated delegation identifiers,
   repeated parent capability identifiers, a leaf named as its own
   parent, and increasing amounts within the delegation chain presented
   at mint or verification time.  Those checks provide local simple-path
   and monotonic amount enforcement.  They do not discover omitted
   parents or establish the digest-linked, graph-wide lineage required
   by Section 10, so they do not close the remaining conformance gap.



















Schrock                  Expires 20 January 2027               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities               July 2026


   The public repository also contains a CI-gated TLA+ model of
   capability registration, reservation, commitment, revocation,
   delegation, replay refusal, and budget conservation.  In the checked
   configuration, three capability identifiers, two operation
   identifiers, amounts from zero through two, delegation depth two, and
   a three-value clock produced 6,033 distinct states; TLC found no
   counterexample to ten configured state invariants and four transition
   properties.  This is bounded evidence about the model, not a
   refinement proof of the JavaScript, SQL, transaction adapter,
   cryptography, lineage verification, or complete protocol defined
   here.  A separate repository witness module contains five
   reachability checks but is not executed by the CI workflow and is not
   represented as proving every assertion non-vacuous.  The model
   obtains delegation acyclicity through its construction rules;
   arbitrary implementation inputs still require the explicit runtime
   traversal and refusal rules in Section 10.

   The main branch also runs a fixed-seed adversarial harness in per-
   push CI over the actual JavaScript in-memory capability and
   consumption stores.  It includes a true-concurrency Promise.all race
   target and a deliberately non-atomic comparison store that
   demonstrates the race detector can expose over-commitment.
   Additional targets exercise accounting and ownership invariants at
   whole-method boundaries.  This is regression evidence for those in-
   process stores, not complete protocol conformance: it does not fuzz
   the PostgreSQL capability transaction path, the atomic handshake RPC,
   replica or connection failures, and no deeper nightly sweep is
   scheduled.

18.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.  A future revision may request a
   media type and registries for receipt versions, scope profiles,
   holder methods, and failure codes after implementation experience
   stabilizes the protocol.

19.  Normative References

   [EP-QUORUM]
              Schrock, I., "Multi-Party Authorization (Quorum) for the
              EMILIA Protocol", 2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/
              draft-schrock-ep-quorum/>.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.




Schrock                  Expires 20 January 2027               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft           EP Bounded Capabilities               July 2026


   [RFC3339]  Klyne, G. and C. Newman, "Date and Time on the Internet:
              Timestamps", RFC 3339, DOI 10.17487/RFC3339, July 2002,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3339>.

   [RFC8032]  Josefsson, S. and I. Liusvaara, "Edwards-Curve Digital
              Signature Algorithm (EdDSA)", RFC 8032,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8032, January 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8032>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

   [RFC8785]  Rundgren, A., Jordan, B., and S. Erdtman, "JSON
              Canonicalization Scheme (JCS)", RFC 8785,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8785, June 2020,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8785>.

20.  Informative References

   [ATTENUATING]
              Niyikiza, E., "OAuth Attenuating Tokens for Agentic AI",
              2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-niyikiza-
              oauth-attenuating-agent-tokens/>.

   [DRP]      Nelson, A., "Delegation Receipt Protocol", 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-nelson-agent-
              delegation-receipts/>.

   [RFC9396]  Lodderstedt, T., Richer, J., and B. Campbell, "OAuth 2.0
              Rich Authorization Requests", RFC 9396,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9396, May 2023,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9396>.

   [TXN-TOKENS]
              Fletcher, G., "Transaction Tokens", 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-oauth-
              transaction-tokens/>.

Author's Address

   Iman Schrock
   EMILIA Protocol, Inc.
   United States of America
   Email: team@emiliaprotocol.ai






Schrock                  Expires 20 January 2027               [Page 18]
