



Network Working Group                                         I. Schrock
Internet-Draft                                     EMILIA Protocol, Inc.
Intended status: Informational                             J. D Kintzele
Expires: 28 March 2027                                  J Diesel NY, LLC
                                                             B. Morrison
                                                                D. Dylan
                                                  Alter Meridian Pty Ltd
                                                       24 September 2026


   GRACE: Evidence-Bound Grid Curtailment Admission, Observation, and
                         Single-Use Settlement
               draft-schrock-kintzele-grid-curtailment-01

Abstract

   This document defines GRACE, an application profile for one bounded
   grid.curtailment action.  EMILIA supplies the exact-action authority
   and admission spine: it binds an approved objective to a pinned
   actuation plan, consumes that authority once in a durable admission
   domain, and preserves unresolved state after possible provider entry.
   An upstream action-specific command-authority proof is an input to
   that admission, and neither it nor the admission is sufficient
   dispatch authority alone.  A deployment-pinned executor adapter
   returns command-channel evidence, and a separately authenticated
   meter supplies observed-effect evidence.

   Safety trips, protective relays, emergency shutdowns, and hardwired
   interlocks remain outside GRACE and continue to operate when the
   Gate, network, identity service, or evidence service is unavailable.
   Missing or ambiguous post-entry evidence is preserved as
   indeterminate and cannot authorize blind retry.

   GRACE verifies signed inputs and deterministic computations.  It does
   not establish physical meter truth, baseline correctness, tariff
   eligibility, actual payment, complete mediation, or a physical grid
   deployment.  An optional hybrid artifact-signature profile combines
   Ed25519 with ML-DSA-65 and requires both signatures to verify.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.



Schrock, et al.           Expires 28 March 2027                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              GRACE Curtailment             September 2026


   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 28 March 2027.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.1.  Requirements Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  Terminology and Roles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Trust and Deployment Inputs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4.  Curtailment Action  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   5.  Participation Envelope and Containment  . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   6.  Human Authorization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   7.  Actuation Plan and Native Command Binding . . . . . . . . . .   8
   8.  Executor Admission and Refusal Semantics  . . . . . . . . . .  10
   9.  Per-Device Dispatch Records . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   10. Meter Statement and Compliance Computation  . . . . . . . . .  12
   11. Partial Execution and Outcome Binding . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   12. Independent Safety Boundary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   13. Action State Signed Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   14. Single-Use Settlement Admission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   15. Proof-of-Curtailment Bundle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   16. Artifact Signature Profiles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   17. Privacy Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   18. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   19. Non-Normative RDU101 Worked Example . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   20. Conformance Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
   21. Implementation Status . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
   22. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
   23. Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
   24. Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23



Schrock, et al.           Expires 28 March 2027                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              GRACE Curtailment             September 2026


   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23

1.  Introduction

   A curtailment instruction can cross several administrative and
   technical boundaries before it changes electrical load.
   Authentication of the dispatcher alone does not answer whether the
   exact event fit a customer-approved participation envelope, whether
   the required people approved it, whether the executor admitted it
   only once, or whether later measurement refers to the same action.

   GRACE keeps those questions separate.  It defines an exact action, a
   bounded envelope, a pinned actuation plan, pre-dispatch authorization
   and admission checks, native-command projection at the first conduit,
   per-device dispatch records, separately authenticated execution and
   measurement claims, outcome reconciliation, and single-use settlement
   admission.  Each relying party selects and pins its own issuers,
   keys, policies, adapters, clocks, conduits, and state stores.

   The profile does not define a demand-response tariff, a baseline
   methodology, a physical meter, a scheduler, a safety system, or a
   payment rail.  Those systems remain authoritative for their own
   claims.  GRACE binds their signed inputs to one action and records
   the result of deterministic verification.  It does not prove that
   every physical effect passed through the Gate.

1.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

   BCP 14 is indexed by the RFC Editor at [BCP14].

2.  Terminology and Roles

   Participation Envelope  A customer-approved, finite set of power,
      energy, count, duration, notice, and time-window bounds.  The
      current profile identifier is EP-FLEX-ENVELOPE-v2.

   Curtailment Action  The closed EP-GRACE-CURTAILMENT-ACTION-v1 object
      that identifies one requested power-reduction event.

   Admission  The executor-side decision that the exact action may enter
      effect custody once.  Admission is not evidence that the effect
      occurred.



Schrock, et al.           Expires 28 March 2027                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              GRACE Curtailment             September 2026


   Command Authority Envelope  An upstream, action-specific proof
      binding a principal's grant to an agent, asset, control verb, and
      expiry.  GRACE verifies it as an input to admission; the envelope
      does not consume GRACE admission.

   Actuation Plan  A deterministic, digest-bound projection of the
      approved curtailment objective into ordered device steps.  The
      plan is not a dispatch acknowledgment or effect observation.

   Native Command Projection  The canonical physical-act fields and
      conduit-established context derived for one plan step at the first
      conduit.  Exact request bytes are retained separately as dispatch
      evidence.

   First Conduit  The earliest deployment-pinned boundary at which a
      GRACE plan step becomes a device- or protocol-specific command.

   Durable Admission Domain  The authoritative state domain that
      atomically reserves, enters, and terminalizes one action across
      every redundant route, worker, handoff, and restart in the
      protected deployment.

   Actuator  The deployment-pinned adapter that attempts the physical or
      scheduler operation and signs an acknowledgment.

   Provider Outcome  The command-channel result reported by the executor
      or downstream provider.  It does not establish the physical
      effect.

   Meter  A separately pinned observation source.  A meter statement is
      a signed source claim, not proof of physical truth or calibration.

   Independent Readback  An authenticated observation from a relying-
      party-pinned source in a control domain distinct from the command-
      channel source.  A declared control-domain identifier is policy
      input, not proof of organizational independence.

   Observed-Effect Relation  The deterministic relation between an
      accepted observation and the effect bound in the approved action,
      such as in_bounds, out_of_bounds, divergent, or unresolved.

   Safety Function  A trip, protective relay, emergency shutdown, or
      interlock whose ability to reach a safe state does not depend on
      GRACE admission.

   Settlement Effect  A deployment-supplied downstream operation invoked





Schrock, et al.           Expires 28 March 2027                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              GRACE Curtailment             September 2026


      only after the required evidence reconciles.  GRACE controls at-
      most-one invocation attempt for one entitlement key.  It does not
      define or prove payment.

3.  Trust and Deployment Inputs

   A conforming deployment MUST independently configure the accepted
   action, envelope, plan, and native-projection versions; approver
   roster and threshold; WebAuthn relying-party identifier and origins;
   accepted upstream command-authority profiles; actuator and meter
   keys; source roles and control-domain identifiers; validity and
   freshness policy; permitted devices, conduits, and command families;
   durable admission-domain identifier; Action State signing key;
   execution store; settlement store; and settlement adapter.
   Presenter-supplied trust anchors or policy values MUST NOT influence
   acceptance.

   When a deployment uses a proof from [OT-COMMAND-AUTHORITY], it MUST
   verify that proof under relying-party policy and evaluate its
   freshness before admission.  The proof MUST bind the signed grant to
   the specific agent, asset, control verb, and expiry and MUST be
   checked for coverage against this specific action, not merely against
   the breadth of the grant.  It establishes who asked and what that
   principal authorized the agent to ask for.  GRACE then admits that
   exact request once and consumes the admission.  Both bindings are
   action-specific; neither is sufficient alone.  The upstream proof
   does not consume GRACE admission and does not establish execution or
   physical effect.

   The deployment MUST maintain an effect-path inventory covering every
   route capable of reaching the controlled devices.  Every route for
   which the deployment claims GRACE enforcement MUST use one configured
   durable admission-domain identifier and one authoritative admission
   state domain.  Redundant ingress, replacement workers, handoffs, and
   restarts MUST NOT mint fresh authority.

   The effect-path inventory MUST enumerate paths by the conduit that
   reaches the device, not only by the application intending to use it.
   Engineering laptops, vendor maintenance tooling, local HMI panels,
   and serial drops behind a gateway are separate paths when they can
   reach the device.  An inventory containing only routes already
   mediated by GRACE is incomplete.









Schrock, et al.           Expires 28 March 2027                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              GRACE Curtailment             September 2026


   Every protected effect path for which a deployment claims GRACE
   enforcement MUST pass through the same admission boundary.  An
   implementation that can be bypassed may still emit evidence, but it
   MUST NOT claim complete enforcement.  A receipt, log entry, or
   transparency inclusion cannot establish the absence of an unmodeled
   bypass path.

4.  Curtailment Action

   The action MUST be a closed JSON object [RFC8259] that can be
   serialized with JCS [RFC8785].  Unknown, duplicated, missing, or non-
   canonicalizable members are a refusal.  Its required members are:

   {
     "@version": "EP-GRACE-CURTAILMENT-ACTION-v1",
     "action_id": "grace:event:...",
     "action_type": "grid.curtailment",
     "effect_class": "power_reduction",
     "facility": "facility:...",
     "target_delta_kw": "18000",
     "window": {
       "not_before": "2026-07-15T20:15:00.000Z",
       "not_after": "2026-07-15T21:45:00.000Z"
     },
     "issued_at": "2026-07-15T20:00:00.000Z",
     "expires_at": "2026-07-15T21:45:00.000Z",
     "baseline_method_hash": "sha256:...",
     "control_mode": "human_on_the_loop",
     "envelope_id": "grace:envelope:...",
     "requested_by": "ep:agent:grid-coordinator"
   }

   target_delta_kw MUST be a positive decimal string with at most three
   fractional digits.  Timestamps MUST be UTC RFC 3339 timestamps with
   millisecond precision.  issued_at MUST precede window.not_before.
   expires_at MUST equal window.not_after.  control_mode is either
   human_on_the_loop or human_in_the_loop.  The baseline-method digest
   commits to the program-selected method; it does not validate that
   method.

   The verifier MUST derive the action digest and CAID [EP-CAID] from
   the exact controlled-action projection.  A supplied identifier MUST
   NOT replace that derivation.








Schrock, et al.           Expires 28 March 2027                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              GRACE Curtailment             September 2026


5.  Participation Envelope and Containment

   The action names one EP-FLEX-ENVELOPE-v2 envelope.  The relying party
   MUST obtain that envelope from its pinned authority and MUST verify
   that it applies to the facility, program, and evaluation time.  The
   bounds object contains positive max_event_mw, max_period_mwh,
   max_events, max_event_hours, min_notice_minutes, and a participation
   window.

   Before dispatch, the executor MUST compare power with power, energy
   with energy, count with count, and duration with duration.  The
   action's MW cannot exceed max_event_mw.  Its MW multiplied by window
   duration cannot exceed the remaining period MWh budget.  One more
   event and its duration must fit the remaining event and event-hour
   budgets.  Its notice and window must fit the envelope.

   A required bound or present spent-accounting value that is missing,
   negative, or unparseable is a refusal.  An omitted spent value
   asserts zero prior settled usage; deployments that cannot make that
   assertion MUST return indeterminate rather than use zero.

   For native-device dispatch, the relying-party policy MUST also
   identify the participating device set, allowed native command
   families, permitted conduits, and plan validity interval.  A plan
   step for a device, command family, conduit, or time outside that
   participation boundary MUST be refused before provider entry.

6.  Human Authorization

   GRACE does not define credential-to-person or credential-to-device
   enrollment.  The relying party MUST state the verified identity-layer
   result and freshness policy it requires.  Without that result, GRACE
   may report that a configured credential signed an input, but it MUST
   NOT infer a natural person from the credential alone.

   The relying party selects an ordered approver roster and a threshold
   using the action-bound authorization evidence in [EP-RECEIPTS].  Each
   accepted approval MUST be a Class-A WebAuthn [WEBAUTHN] signoff over
   a context that binds the controlled action digest, actuation-plan
   digest, presentation digest, policy digest, initiator, approver,
   roster index, threshold, validity window, relying-party profile, app,
   platform, credential, and device key.









Schrock, et al.           Expires 28 March 2027                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              GRACE Curtailment             September 2026


   The verifier MUST require user verification, the pinned relying-party
   identifier and origin, distinct approvers, distinct device and
   credential identifiers, initiator exclusion, the exact roster index,
   and the selected threshold.  The quorum semantics are those of
   [EP-QUORUM].  A valid signature that does not match the relying
   party's current roster, policy, action, presentation, or ceremony
   window is a refusal.

7.  Actuation Plan and Native Command Binding

   A deployment that projects one curtailment action into one or more
   device commands MUST derive a deterministic actuation plan before
   admission.  The plan MUST bind the exact action digest, envelope
   digest, plan validity interval, participating devices, ordered steps,
   and the configured durable admission-domain identifier.  The complete
   plan MUST be canonicalized and hashed.  Human authorization and the
   admission record MUST bind that plan digest.

   Each plan step MUST contain at least a step identifier, device
   identifier, conduit identifier, command-family identifier, native
   command digest, security-context digest, and order within the plan.
   The native command digest covers the complete, canonically encoded
   set of material fields and conduit-established context defined by the
   pinned transport binding.  The security-context digest covers the
   security-relevant addressing, protocol, authentication, role, and
   transport context used to interpret the request.  A per-attempt
   native request digest separately covers the exact bytes sent.
























Schrock, et al.           Expires 28 March 2027                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              GRACE Curtailment             September 2026


   {
     "@version": "EP-GRACE-ACTUATION-PLAN-v1",
     "plan_id": "grace:plan:...",
     "action_id": "grace:event:...",
     "action_digest": "sha256:...",
     "envelope_digest": "sha256:...",
     "admission_domain_id": "grace:admission-domain:...",
     "validity": {
       "not_before": "2026-07-15T20:15:00.000Z",
       "not_after": "2026-07-15T21:45:00.000Z"
     },
     "steps": [{
       "step_id": "step:1",
       "order": 1,
       "device_id": "device:...",
       "conduit_id": "conduit:...",
       "command_family": "deployment-pinned-family",
       "native_command_digest": "sha256:...",
       "security_context_digest": "sha256:..."
     }]
   }

   The plan and native command are separate bindings.  The plan is the
   protocol-independent projection of the approved objective.  The
   native command is derived at the first conduit under one pinned
   transport binding.  Binding only the plan leaves the device operation
   unbound; binding only the command leaves the approved objective
   unbound.

   A transport binding MUST classify every field in a native request
   into exactly one of four classes: material, conduit context,
   correlation only, or fixed or derived.  Material and conduit context
   contribute to the native-command digest.  Correlation-only and fixed-
   or-derived fields do not.  A field that cannot be classified, or a
   malformed request, MUST be refused before admission and before
   evidence lookup.

   Device identity MUST come from conduit-established link or session
   context, not from a sender assertion on the wire.  A wire value
   inconsistent with that context MUST be refused without resolving the
   disagreement in favor of either source.  A Modbus unit identifier of
   zero MUST be refused by a device-scoped binding because it may denote
   broadcast rather than one device.

   The classification binds the physical operation, not a display label
   or the incidental number of octets carrying it.  A Modbus 4xxxxx or
   0xxxxx label MUST NOT replace the zero-based protocol address.
   Modbus function 0x06 and function 0x10 with quantity one encode the



Schrock, et al.           Expires 28 March 2027                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              GRACE Curtailment             September 2026


   same single-register write through different field sets and therefore
   yield different native-command digests.  A conduit MUST NOT normalize
   either form into the other, and authority bound to one form MUST NOT
   admit the other.  DNP3 requests that vary only in an unbound
   qualifier encoding MUST identify the same operation and yield the
   same native-command digest when the pinned binding decodes them to
   the same complete field set.  The complete DNP3 control octet,
   operation count, on-time, and off-time are material and MUST be
   bound.

   Two-phase DNP3 SELECT and OPERATE and multi-object requests are
   outside this revision.  A later profile admitting them MUST bind both
   phases to one authorization and state machine, or the complete
   ordered object set to one digest, respectively.

   Encoding, projection, transport acceptance, and authority to dispatch
   are separate claims.  A serializer or conduit that successfully
   produces or accepts native bytes does not authorize those bytes.
   Mutation of a material action field, plan field, classified native-
   operation field, or security-relevant context after authorization
   MUST cause a refusal.  A correlation-only field may vary without
   changing the authorized physical act, but it MUST NOT serve as the
   attempt reference.

   This revision deliberately leaves protocol-specific Modbus, DNP3, and
   vendor command-field profiles to separate deployment bindings.  Such
   a binding MUST identify every material field and its canonical byte
   representation; it MUST NOT weaken the generic binding above.

8.  Executor Admission and Refusal Semantics

   The executor applies the Action Evidence Boundary [EP-AEB] in this
   order:

   1.  Validate the closed action and deterministic actuation plan and
       require both to be active.

   2.  Derive and verify action-to-envelope and plan-to-participation
       containment.

   3.  Derive the expected outcome policy and require its digest to be
       inside the human-approved policy bytes.

   4.  Verify the human authorization over the exact action and plan
       digests against the pinned profile.






Schrock, et al.           Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft              GRACE Curtailment             September 2026


   5.  Verify every required upstream action-specific command-authority
       proof, including grant coverage, expiry, and freshness, under
       relying-party policy.

   6.  Require the pinned first conduit, executor adapter, meter, Action
       State signer, admission store, settlement store, and settlement
       adapter.

   7.  Atomically reserve the exact execution idempotency key before
       provider entry.

   The execution idempotency key MUST bind the action identifier, action
   digest, actuation-plan digest, and configured durable admission-
   domain identifier.  Every ingress path, executor instance, handoff,
   and restart MUST use the same authoritative store.  The authority-
   spend record and provider-attempt record MUST be created together or
   not at all in one durable, atomic transaction.  Executor ownership
   MUST be fenced so that a losing owner cannot complete provider entry
   after the fence moves; a lease timeout alone is insufficient.
   Concurrent reservation failure is refuse_replay.  Storage
   unavailability is a refusal before provider entry.

   A deployment MUST distinguish a failure known to have occurred before
   provider entry from a failure after provider entry may have occurred.
   Once provider entry may have occurred, a lost, malformed,
   conflicting, or exceptional result MUST produce
   execution_indeterminate.  The executor MUST preserve or burn the
   reservation, set retry_safe to false, and MUST NOT invoke the same
   admission again.  Authenticated reconciliation is required.  A later
   attempt is a new action with new authority.

   The execution_indeterminate state is GRACE's mapping of the
   unresolved state in [OT-COMMAND-AUTHORITY].  The consumed authority
   and provider-attempt record MUST survive a Gate or enforcement-point
   restart; a power cycle MUST NOT restore consumed authority to unused.

   Pre-invocation failures use a mechanism-named refusal such as
   refuse_action, refuse_action_not_active, refuse_outside_envelope,
   refuse_outcome_policy, refuse_authorization, or
   refuse_adapter_unavailable.  Post-invocation evidence failures use
   effect_unconfirmed and are not retry authorization.

9.  Per-Device Dispatch Records

   The dispatch request MUST bind the complete action, action digest,
   envelope digest, actuation-plan digest, plan-step identifier, native-
   command digest, security-context digest, human-authorization digest,
   execution idempotency key, and operator.



Schrock, et al.           Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft              GRACE Curtailment             September 2026


   For every device attempt, the implementation MUST preserve the
   operation, admission, plan-step, device, conduit, and attempt
   identifiers; native-command, exact native-request, and security-
   context digests; admission and provider-entry times; command-channel
   acknowledgment state; provider outcome and evidence digest; and, when
   available, the observed-effect relation, evidence digest, and
   observation time.  One aggregate success value MUST NOT hide a
   missing, failed, or unresolved device attempt.

   The attempt identifier MUST NOT be a protocol correlation field.  In
   particular, an SNMP request-id, Modbus MBAP transaction identifier,
   or DNP3 application-control sequence number is client-chosen and
   reusable and does not identify any part of the physical act.

   A COSA acknowledgment, or an acknowledgment returned by another
   deployment-pinned executor adapter, MUST bind the event, action,
   plan, step, dispatch-request, idempotency key, executor identity,
   provider outcome, and dispatch time, and MUST verify under the pinned
   executor key.  It is downstream evidence about a dispatch that EMILIA
   has already admitted.  It does not authorize the action and does not
   establish that electrical load changed.

   A native function that defines no application response is an ordinary
   protocol case, not proof of failure.  After a DNP3 DIRECT_OPERATE_NR
   request has crossed provider entry, the attempt is indeterminate
   unless independent authenticated reconciliation establishes the
   effect.  The authority remains consumed and the request MUST NOT be
   retried under the same admission.

10.  Meter Statement and Compliance Computation

   The meter statement MUST bind the meter identifier, event identifier,
   action digest, exact action window, unit, baseline MW, ordered
   sequence of timestamped load intervals, measurement class,
   observation time, and signer key identifier.  It MUST verify under a
   separately pinned meter key.

   For an observation to be used as independent readback, its source
   MUST be in a relying-party-pinned control domain distinct from the
   command-channel source.  A status object returned by the same
   management card, executor, or command conduit is command-channel
   evidence, even when it uses a different object identifier.  It MUST
   NOT be relabeled as independent effect evidence.

   The meter statement MUST NOT contain baseline_method_hash.  Program
   and tariff rules remain in the authorized action and relying-party
   policy.  This separates a signed measurement-source claim from the
   rule used to interpret it.



Schrock, et al.           Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft              GRACE Curtailment             September 2026


   The reference computation subtracts average interval load from the
   signed baseline MW, divides the delivered MW by ordered MW, and marks
   the event compliant at a profile-selected threshold.  A deployment
   MUST pin the computation and threshold it uses.  The result states
   what follows from the accepted inputs.  It does not prove the
   baseline was economically correct, the readings were physically true,
   or the event qualifies under a tariff.

11.  Partial Execution and Outcome Binding

   The action's human-approved policy binds source-routed predictions
   for an executor observation and an independent-observer meter
   observation.  Each Outcome Observation [EP-OUTCOME] MUST bind the
   authorization record, action digest, CAID, consumption nonce,
   operation identifier, facility, observation window, source role,
   source class, and observed effect.

   The relying party MUST pin source keys, roles, classes, control
   domains, status and validity, distinctness requirements, observation
   windows, and maximum attestation delay.  A declared control domain is
   relying-party policy input, not proof of organizational independence.

   An independent observation is admissible only when its control domain
   is distinct from the command channel, it verifies under its own
   pinned key, and its observation time is inside the admitted window.
   A second object read from the same communications card is in the same
   control domain and MUST NOT satisfy independent readback.  An
   inadmissible observation and an admissible observation that disagrees
   are different results and MUST NOT share one stored state.

   Each device attempt MUST retain one of five states: not_entered,
   invoking, committed, proven_not_committed, or indeterminate.  A
   device moves to invoking at provider entry. committed requires both
   command-channel evidence and an independently authenticated
   admissible observation. proven_not_committed requires positive
   evidence from the sending host that the operation did not leave it;
   absence of an acknowledgment is insufficient.  Every other post-entry
   result is terminal indeterminate for that attempt.

   The command-channel statement and independent observation MUST be
   stored separately.  Reconciliation writes a third record and MUST NOT
   overwrite either source record.  It may resolve the attempt; it never
   grants permission to redispatch.

   A restart or ownership handoff while any device is invoking or
   indeterminate MUST NOT create new dispatch authority.  The
   replacement owner inherits the existing attempt, first reads the
   durable admission and attempt history, and does not open a second



Schrock, et al.           Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft              GRACE Curtailment             September 2026


   attempt.  A new admission for the same action while an earlier
   attempt remains indeterminate is refused by default.  A deployment
   that deliberately widens that rule MUST record the widened policy and
   the new authority; it cannot reuse the first admission.

   The aggregate result MUST be derived from the complete per-device
   matrix.  While any device remains indeterminate, the aggregate is
   indeterminate.  A command-channel acceptance with an out-of-bounds
   admissible readback is effect_observed and out_of_bounds, not
   effect_confirmed.  A command-channel rejection with an in-bounds
   admissible readback is divergent.  Missing, stale, wrong-window,
   same-domain, or otherwise inadmissible readback is
   effect_unconfirmed.  These states MUST NOT be collapsed into a
   generic success, failure, or retry authorization.

   The minimum control-room view MUST show, per device: what was
   requested in plant terms; the command-channel result and time; the
   independent observation and whether it was admissible; each failed
   admissibility condition; the five-state device result; any observed
   interlock action; and any requested operator action.  Unknown values
   MUST be shown as unknown rather than as zero or blank.

   Any summary label shown to an operator MUST be derived from the
   underlying facts at display time and MUST NOT replace those facts in
   storage.

   Settlement admission requires a reconciled, committed result with the
   profile-selected in-bounds relation.  No other state may reach the
   settlement adapter.

12.  Independent Safety Boundary

   Trips, protective relays, emergency shutdowns, branch protection, and
   hardwired interlocks are outside the GRACE authority and admission
   path.  The upstream command-authority proof [OT-COMMAND-AUTHORITY]
   does not alter that safety boundary.  A GRACE implementation MUST NOT
   delay, suppress, consume, or condition authority required by an
   independent safety function.  The safety function MUST remain capable
   of reaching its safe state while the Gate, network, identity service,
   evidence service, or executor adapter is unavailable.

   A safety action may be observed and recorded after the fact.  Such a
   record MUST NOT claim that GRACE admitted the safety action or count
   it as admitted curtailment.  A safety trip during an unresolved
   dispatch also MUST NOT authorize replay of the original admission.






Schrock, et al.           Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft              GRACE Curtailment             September 2026


   GRACE cannot establish that a protective path is independent.  A
   deployment claiming conformance MUST declare each protective path and
   demonstrate its operation with the Gate, admission store, identity
   services, and network unavailable.  Routing a protective function
   through the Gate merely to record it violates this section.

13.  Action State Signed Statement

   Before provider entry, a deployment policy may require a signed audit
   statement over the exact action, plan, authorization, admission, and
   first-conduit projections.  Registering that statement with a
   transparency service does not authorize dispatch and does not
   establish later execution or effect.

   After outcome reconciliation, the profile emits a COSE_Sign1
   [RFC9052] Action State Signed Statement using [ACTION-STATE] format
   version 2 and media type application/agent-action-capsule+json.  The
   statement binds the action, actuation plan, admission domain,
   operator, developer, authorization digest, per-device dispatch
   records, meter digest, constraints evaluated, disposition, and
   confirmed or unresolved effect.

   The capsule identifier is derived from canonical capsule bytes.  The
   JSON wrapper, COSE payload, protected headers, key identifier, and
   statement digest MUST cross-check.  The current reference output is
   an unregistered_signed_statement.  It is not a SCITT transparency-
   service registration or proof of ledger inclusion.  When a deployment
   adds SCITT inclusion evidence, that evidence proves only the
   statement's inclusion under the transparency-service policy.

14.  Single-Use Settlement Admission

   The one-time entitlement key is the injective serialization of
   [envelope_id, event_id, meter_payload_digest] under profile EP-GRACE-
   SETTLE-v1.  Every member is required.  The meter digest MUST be a
   lowercase SHA-256 digest of the accepted signed meter body.

   Only a compliant computation and an in-bounds reconciled outcome may
   reach the settlement adapter.  The settlement store MUST reserve the
   entitlement atomically before invocation.  A duplicate is
   settlement_already_consumed.  If invocation begins and its result is
   unknown, the implementation MUST commit or preserve the reservation
   and MUST NOT issue another settlement attempt under the same
   entitlement.







Schrock, et al.           Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft              GRACE Curtailment             September 2026


   This is at-most-one admission to the configured settlement effect in
   one authoritative state domain.  It is not exactly-once physical
   payment, global double-spend prevention across independent
   authorities, tariff eligibility, or evidence that funds moved.

15.  Proof-of-Curtailment Bundle

   The EP-GRACE-PROOF-OF-CURTAILMENT-v1 bundle is a signed, offline-
   verifiable summary.  It binds the action and action digest, envelope
   digest, baseline-method digest, actuation plan and digest,
   authorization digest, admission record, native-command projections,
   per-device attempts, provider-evidence digests, readback-evidence
   digests, complete device-state matrix, aggregate Outcome Binding
   result, deterministic compliance result, Action State statement
   digest, and settlement admission result.  Unavailable evidence MUST
   remain explicit; it MUST NOT be omitted in a way that implies
   success.

   Bundle verification establishes integrity and binding relative to the
   verifier's pinned trust and policy inputs.  It does not independently
   establish any source claim as real-world truth.

16.  Artifact Signature Profiles

   The baseline profile signs canonical artifact bytes with Ed25519.
   The optional EP-GRACE-ARTIFACT-SIGNATURE-v2 profile uses a fixed
   required algorithm list, in order: Ed25519 and ML-DSA-65 [FIPS204].
   Its signing bytes commit to the complete artifact and the required
   algorithm list.

   A v2 verifier MUST require exactly one signature under each
   independently pinned key and MUST accept only when both signatures
   verify.  Missing algorithms, reordered or narrowed requirements, key
   substitution, malformed signatures, or an unavailable ML-DSA verifier
   are refusals.  A v1 verifier MUST NOT silently accept a v2 artifact.

   Hybrid signing provides cryptographic migration evidence.  It does
   not make a software-held key hardware-backed, FIPS validated,
   deployed, or operationally independent.  A deployment claiming the
   hybrid profile MUST identify and protect both actual signing keys.











Schrock, et al.           Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft              GRACE Curtailment             September 2026


17.  Privacy Considerations

   Curtailment records can reveal facility identity, capacity, operating
   schedules, energy consumption, human approvers, device identifiers,
   and commercial program terms.  Implementations SHOULD minimize
   portable fields, disclose raw intervals only to parties that require
   them, use digests when independent recomputation is not required, and
   apply retention and access policies appropriate to critical-
   infrastructure data.

   Selective disclosure or encryption cannot repair an overbroad signed
   source object.  Deployments SHOULD separate public verification
   material from restricted operational evidence and preserve enough
   binding information to detect substitution.

18.  Security Considerations

   The principal attacks are action substitution, envelope overflow,
   actuation-plan or native-command substitution, stale approval,
   initiator self-approval, duplicate approvers, split admission
   domains, bypass paths, redundant-route or replacement-worker replay,
   executor ownership races, crash or restart after possible provider
   entry, partial actuation, lost acknowledgment, actuator-key
   substitution, stale or conflicting readback, meter-key substitution,
   market-rule smuggling into meter data, observation-source collapse,
   accidental capture of an independent safety path, wrapper
   substitution, signature-leg stripping, and duplicate settlement
   admission.  The preceding sections require fail-closed checks or
   explicit indeterminate states for each.

   Key compromise remains a trust-root failure.  Historical signatures
   can establish what a key signed; they do not prove who controlled the
   key or that the signed claim was true.  A separately keyed meter
   under the same operator's control may improve fault isolation but
   does not create organizational independence.

   GRACE cannot prove that the selected baseline is fair, a meter is
   calibrated or untampered, a scheduler has no bypass, a declared
   control domain is honest, a payment rail moved funds, or an
   authority's upstream population is complete.  Deployment claims MUST
   state those acceptance roots.










Schrock, et al.           Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft              GRACE Curtailment             September 2026


19.  Non-Normative RDU101 Worked Example

   This section is an implementation sketch supplied for review.  It is
   not a protocol requirement and does not report an energized actuation
   test.  The cited hardware characterization is read-only: TEST-01 is
   complete, TEST-02 remains strictly on hold, and no outlet was de-
   energized during this work.

   The example device is a Vertiv Liebert GXT5-3000LVRT2UXLN, rated 2700
   W, 3000 VA, and 120 V AC, with NEMA 5-20R programmable receptacles.
   A Liebert RDU101 management card running firmware 1.9.3.0 exposes
   LIEBERT_GP_PWR.MIB over SNMPv3 AuthPriv using SHA-1 authentication
   and AES-128 privacy.  The proposed action is to de-energize
   programmable receptacle group 2 through point 4365,
   lgpPwrOutputReceptacleControlEntry, at OID
   1.3.6.1.4.1.476.1.42.3.9.20.1.20.1.2.1.4365.2.  Four rows, indices 1
   through 4, were present during characterization.  The outlet-group
   identifier is a different object and is not the command target.

   The worked-example topology consumes the action-specific proof
   defined by [OT-COMMAND-AUTHORITY] before EMILIA admission and keeps
   independent observation and safety outside the command path.

   [OT-COMMAND-AUTHORITY] action-specific proof + proposed action
                          |
                          v
   EMILIA exact-action authority + admission + one-time consumption
                          |
                          v
   COSA adapter -> RDU101 SNMPv3 SET -> command ACK
                          |
                          v
   separate Modbus domain -> independent meter readback
                          |
                          v
   EMILIA reconciliation -> Action State -> settlement

   REPO / E-stop / branch protection: hardwired outside every path

                Figure 1: Example control and evidence order

   A Command Authority Envelope conforming to [OT-COMMAND-AUTHORITY]
   establishes who asked and what that principal authorized the agent to
   ask for, bound to this action, asset, control verb, and expiry.
   EMILIA evaluates that proof as an upstream input, binds the exact
   action and RDU101 projection, and admits and consumes that exact
   request once before provider entry.  Both bindings are per-action and
   neither is sufficient alone.  The COSA adapter then issues the native



Schrock, et al.           Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft              GRACE Curtailment             September 2026


   SNMPv3 operation and returns the RDU101 response as downstream
   command-channel evidence.  An SNMP SetResponse means that the
   management card processed the SET.  It does not establish the
   electrical state of the receptacle or the attached load.

   The independent readback in this example comes from an instrumented
   Modbus power meter through a separate channel and control domain from
   the RDU101.  A second object read through the RDU101 remains same-
   domain command-channel evidence and is not independent readback.  The
   hardwired REPO input, emergency stop, and branch overcurrent device
   remain outside the upstream command-authority proof
   [OT-COMMAND-AUTHORITY], EMILIA, and COSA and continue to operate
   without them.

   Nominal  An authenticated accepted acknowledgment plus independent
      readback within the approved bound yields in_bounds,
      effect_confirmed, and invoked_confirmed in the EP-GRACE-PROOF-OF-
      CURTAILMENT-v1 bundle.

   Degraded communications  A transport timeout or unavailable channel
      after possible provider entry yields degraded_transport_timeout,
      reason channel_unavailable, effect_unconfirmed, retry_safe=false,
      and not_invoked_refused.

   Missed bound or discrepant readback  An accepted acknowledgment with
      admissible out-of-bounds readback yields state_mismatch,
      out_of_bounds, effect_observed, and not_invoked_refused, not
      effect_confirmed.

   Conflicting telemetry  A command-channel result and admissible
      readback that conflict yield state_mismatch, divergent,
      effect_divergent, and not_invoked_refused.

   Unresolved readback  Missing, stale, same-domain, or otherwise
      inadmissible readback yields state_mismatch, a null observed-
      effect relation, effect_unconfirmed, and not_invoked_refused.

   Safety interlock trip  A hardwired interlock trip is recorded as
      safety_interlock_tripped, effect_unconfirmed, and
      not_invoked_refused.  It is not an in-bounds GRACE effect, and the
      same admission is not retried.

   Every non-nominal path stops the same admission.  There is no ambient
   or blind retry across degraded communications, disagreement,
   unresolved readback, or an independent interlock trip.  A subsequent
   attempt requires a new action, new authorization, and new admission.





Schrock, et al.           Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft              GRACE Curtailment             September 2026


20.  Conformance Cases

   A conformance suite for the -01 requirements MUST cover at least:

   1.   exact objective, plan, classified native-command, and native-
        request binding;

   2.   refusal when a material native-operation field or security-
        relevant context changes;

   3.   concurrent duplicate arrival through two ingress paths sharing
        one durable admission domain;

   4.   a replacement worker attempting the same operation without being
        granted fresh authority;

   5.   a restart known to occur before provider entry;

   6.   a lost response after provider entry, preserving consumed
        authority and retry_safe=false;

   7.   partial execution across multiple devices;

   8.   admissible command acknowledgment and readback that conflict;

   9.   authenticated reconciliation that resolves an attempt without
        redispatch;

   10.  operation of the declared protective path with the Gate,
        admission store, identity services, and network unavailable;

   11.  a new executor instance inheriting an indeterminate attempt
        without second entry or fresh authority;

   12.  same-domain readback recorded as inadmissible and distinguished
        from admissible readback that disagrees; and

   13.  an aggregate that remains indeterminate while any one of several
        devices is unresolved.

   The staged packet validates document integrity and claim boundaries.
   It does not claim that these thirteen behavioral cases have been
   implemented or passed.

21.  Implementation Status

   This section records implementation evidence and may be removed
   before publication as an RFC.



Schrock, et al.           Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft              GRACE Curtailment             September 2026


   The public EMILIA repository [GRACE-IMPLEMENTATION] contains a
   TypeScript reference circuit for exact action construction, two
   distinct Class-A approvals, bounded admission, a COSA-labeled
   simulated actuator, a separately keyed simulated meter, Outcome
   Binding, an Action State Signed Statement, and one-time settlement
   admission.  The adapters are marked simulation: true.  The circuit is
   not evidence of a physical grid event, production COSA integration,
   utility adoption, meter truth, or an actual payment.

   The published -00 packet recorded 80 targeted tests across four files
   and six declared vertical vectors [GRACE-VECTORS].  Those are same-
   team reference results, not an independent implementation or
   interoperability claim.  They do not validate the new -01 actuation-
   plan, first-conduit, per-device, durable-domain, safety-boundary, or
   RDU101 requirements.

   This -01 text is a staged review candidate.  Its companion validation
   checks document integrity and the required claim boundaries.  No
   energized actuation test, production COSA integration, utility
   deployment, or physical meter validation has been performed for this
   revision.

22.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.  The grid.curtailment and EP-
   GRACE-* identifiers are profile-local strings and are not entries in
   an IANA registry.

23.  Normative References

   [ACTION-STATE]
              Mih, S. W., "An Agent Action Capsule Profile for SCITT",
              Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-mih-scitt-agent-
              action-capsule-02, July 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-mih-scitt-agent-
              action-capsule/>.

   [BCP14]    IETF, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
              Levels", <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp14>.

   [EP-AEB]   Schrock, I., "Action Evidence Boundary: Binding Verified
              Authorization Evidence to Agent Execution", Work in
              Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-schrock-action-evidence-
              boundary-04, August 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-schrock-action-
              evidence-boundary/>.





Schrock, et al.           Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft              GRACE Curtailment             September 2026


   [EP-CAID]  Schrock, I., "Canonical Action Identifier: Stable Identity
              for Material Agent Actions", Work in Progress, Internet-
              Draft, draft-schrock-canonical-action-identifier-02,
              August 2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-
              schrock-canonical-action-identifier/>.

   [EP-OUTCOME]
              Schrock, I., "Outcome Binding for High-Risk Agent
              Actions", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-schrock-
              ep-outcome-binding-00, July 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-schrock-ep-
              outcome-binding/>.

   [EP-QUORUM]
              Schrock, I., "Multi-Party Quorum Authorization for High-
              Risk Agent Actions", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft,
              draft-schrock-ep-quorum-03, July 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-schrock-ep-
              quorum/>.

   [EP-RECEIPTS]
              Schrock, I., "Authorization Receipts for High-Risk Agent
              Actions", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-schrock-
              ep-authorization-receipts-12, August 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-schrock-ep-
              authorization-receipts/>.

   [FIPS204]  National Institute of Standards and Technology, "Module-
              Lattice-Based Digital Signature Standard", FIPS 204,
              August 2024, <https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.FIPS.204>.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

   [RFC8259]  Bray, T., Ed., "The JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) Data
              Interchange Format", STD 90, RFC 8259,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8259, December 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8259>.







Schrock, et al.           Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 22]

Internet-Draft              GRACE Curtailment             September 2026


   [RFC8785]  Rundgren, A., Jordan, B., and S. Erdtman, "JSON
              Canonicalization Scheme (JCS)", RFC 8785,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8785, June 2020,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8785>.

   [RFC9052]  Schaad, J., "CBOR Object Signing and Encryption (COSE):
              Structures and Process", STD 96, RFC 9052,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9052, August 2022,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9052>.

   [WEBAUTHN] World Wide Web Consortium, "Web Authentication: An API for
              accessing Public Key Credentials - Level 2", April 2021,
              <https://www.w3.org/TR/webauthn-2/>.

24.  Informative References

   [GRACE-IMPLEMENTATION]
              EMILIA Protocol, "GRACE Reference Implementation", 2026,
              <https://github.com/emiliaprotocol/emilia-
              protocol/tree/main/lib/grace>.

   [GRACE-VECTORS]
              EMILIA Protocol, "GRACE Mobile Grid Vertical Composition
              Vectors", 2026, <https://github.com/emiliaprotocol/emilia-
              protocol/blob/main/conformance/vectors/grace-mobile-
              grid.v1.json>.

   [OT-COMMAND-AUTHORITY]
              Morrison, B. and C. Whiteside, "Consented and Attributable
              Agent Authority for Operational-Technology Control
              Actions", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-
              morrison-ot-command-authority-02, 31 August 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-morrison-ot-
              command-authority/>.

Authors' Addresses

   Iman Schrock
   EMILIA Protocol, Inc.
   United States of America
   Email: team@emiliaprotocol.ai


   Justin D Kintzele
   J Diesel NY, LLC
   United States of America
   Email: jkintzele@jdieselny.com




Schrock, et al.           Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 23]

Internet-Draft              GRACE Curtailment             September 2026


   Blake Morrison
   Alter Meridian Pty Ltd
   Australia
   Email: blake@truealter.com


   Drew Dylan
   Alter Meridian Pty Ltd
   Australia
   Email: drew@truealter.com









































Schrock, et al.           Expires 28 March 2027                [Page 24]
