



Network Working Group                                         I. Schrock
Internet-Draft                                     EMILIA Protocol, Inc.
Intended status: Informational                            11 August 2026
Expires: 12 February 2027


  Binding Named-Human Authorization Evidence into Agent-Action Records
              draft-schrock-human-authorization-binding-01

Abstract

   A recurring pattern spans the agent-action record formats now in
   development: a record about an agent's action reserves a place for
   "the human authorization" — an approver disposition, an authority
   context, a human-override field, an actor slot, a signed grant, an
   approval reference — and leaves its semantics undefined.  Each
   format, reasonably, does not want to specify human-authorization
   evidence itself; none, so far, says what filling the slot means.
   This document defines that one thing, host-agnostically: how any
   record binds named-human authorization evidence, either BY REFERENCE
   (a content digest of the authorization artifact's canonical bytes) or
   EMBEDDED (a compact, self-describing claim carrying named approvals
   and optional distinct-human quorum semantics), with seven
   requirements that make the binding mean the same thing in every host:
   digest grounding, action agreement, verified-versus-accepted
   discipline, fail-closed absence, and embedded/referenced consistency,
   authoritative approver attribution, and role non-equivalence.  The
   SCITT signed-statement host family is expressed concretely (digest
   selection, and the observed-absence statement that is the only way
   absence of authorization becomes evidence); an informative appendix
   maps the binding onto the reserved slots of eleven current documents.
   This document defines no new authorization format: the referenced
   evidence verifies under its own specification.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."



Schrock                 Expires 12 February 2027                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         Human-Authorization Binding           August 2026


   This Internet-Draft will expire on 12 February 2027.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.1.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  Binding by Reference  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  The Embedded Claim  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Binding Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   5.  Terminal Accountability Is Not Per-Action Human
           Authorization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   6.  Mid-Execution Acquisition and Resource-Server Challenges  . .   6
   7.  Expression for SCITT Signed Statements  . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     7.1.  Denial, Absence, and Observed Absence . . . . . . . . . .   8
   8.  Claim Naming  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   9.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   10. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   11. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     11.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     11.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   Appendix A.  Host-Format Mappings (Informative) . . . . . . . . .  10
   Appendix B.  Implementation Status  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12

1.  Introduction

   Record formats for agent actions are proliferating, and almost all of
   them make the same, sound scoping decision: human authorization is
   somebody else's format.  The result is a set of reserved-but-empty
   slots.  A post-execution action capsule carries an approver
   disposition whose authority is opaque; a pre-execution permit stubs
   an authority context; audit-trail records carry a human-override
   field with a privacy carve-out where the human should be; a
   provenance graph has an optional actor; an audit architecture



Schrock                 Expires 12 February 2027                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         Human-Authorization Binding           August 2026


   requires a "signed grant" whose format is an unassigned work item; an
   intent chain names an approval reference with no semantics.  Each
   slot is an invitation.  Eleven invitations with eleven ad-hoc answers
   would be worse than none.

   This document is the single answer: a host-agnostic definition of
   what it means to bind named-human authorization evidence into any
   record, plus the small set of requirements that keep the binding
   trustworthy regardless of host.  The reserved slots this profile
   serves appear, at this writing, in draft-mih-scitt-agent-action-
   capsule, draft-munoz-scitt-permit-profile, draft-sharif-agent-audit-
   trail, draft-bates-atp, draft-aylward-aiga, draft-nelson-agent-
   delegation-receipts, draft-rosenberg-aiproto-cheq, draft-yossif-psea,
   draft-kuehlewind-audit-architecture, the ACP charter, and the SPICE-
   adjacent intent-chain work — the mappings in Appendix A are offered
   for those authors to correct or adopt.  It deliberately does not
   define the authorization evidence itself — a bound artifact verifies
   under its own specification (for example
   [I-D.schrock-ep-authorization-receipts] for named-human receipts and
   quorum) — and the appendix mappings to host formats are informative
   descriptions of public slot fields, offered for host authors to
   correct or adopt.

1.1.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

   Host record: any signed or logged record about an agent action that
   carries the binding (a capsule, permit, audit record, provenance
   node, token, or chain).  Authorization artifact: the evidence being
   bound (a named-human authorization receipt, a quorum receipt, or an
   equivalent artifact defined elsewhere).

   This document distinguishes the system or asset owner, the delegating
   principal, the terminal accountable authority, the per-action human
   approver, the logical agent, the live workload instance, the OAuth
   client, the executor or resource server, and the target tool and
   material action.  These are separate roles.  The same party MAY
   occupy more than one role, but a verifier MUST NOT infer such
   equality without separately verified evidence that establishes the
   relationship required by relying-party policy.






Schrock                 Expires 12 February 2027                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         Human-Authorization Binding           August 2026


2.  Binding by Reference

   The reference form is a JSON member (claim name
   "human_authorization_ref"; see Section 8) carried anywhere in the
   host record the host format designates:

   "human_authorization_ref": {
     "digest": "sha256:<hex of the artifact's canonical bytes>",
     "format": "ep-receipt | ep-quorum | <other artifact type>",
     "locator": "<OPTIONAL hint URI; acquisition is out of scope>"
   }

   The digest MUST be computed over the authorization artifact's
   canonical bytes as defined by the artifact's own specification (for
   EP artifacts, the JCS [RFC8785] I-JSON profile).  The locator is a
   hint only: a verifier obtains the artifact through whatever channel
   the deployment provides, and relies on digest equality, never on the
   channel.  The reference form supports disclosure minimization: a host
   record can travel without the artifact, and a relying party that
   requires the evidence fails closed until the bytes are produced.

3.  The Embedded Claim

   The embedded form carries the evidence inline as a compact, self-
   describing claim (claim name "human_authorization"):

   "human_authorization": {
     "v": "EP-HAC-v1",
     "action_digest": "sha256:<hex>",
     "mode": "single | quorum",
     "approvals": [
       { "approver": "<named accountable principal>",
         "role": "<OPTIONAL>",
         "key_class": "A | B | C",
         "identity_evidence": {
           "format": "<native enrollment or identity format>",
           "digest": "sha256:<hex of canonical evidence bytes>"
         },
         "signoff": { "...the approver's own signature object..." } }
     ],
     "policy": "<OPTIONAL policy identifier>",
     "quorum": { "required": 2, "distinct_humans": true,
                 "ordered": false }
   }

   Each approval names a per-action human approver and carries that
   principal's own signature over the action binding, verifiable offline
   under the artifact specification the claim profiles.  The



Schrock                 Expires 12 February 2027                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         Human-Authorization Binding           August 2026


   identity_evidence member binds the approver identifier and signing
   key to enrollment or identity evidence defined by its native
   specification; its digest follows the same canonical-byte rule as
   Section 2.  When mode is "quorum", the distinct-humans and ordering
   semantics of [I-D.schrock-ep-quorum] apply: the required number of
   DISTINCT enrolled human approvers, not merely distinct signatures.
   Key classes classify key custody as defined by the receipts
   specification and imply nothing about assurance levels.

4.  Binding Requirements

   Seven requirements hold for every host, and they are what make the
   binding mean the same thing everywhere:

   1.  B1: Digest grounding.  A binding is credited only against
       artifact bytes: the reference form by digest equality, the
       embedded form by verifying the contained signatures.  A host
       field that merely asserts "a human approved" without either MUST
       NOT be treated as human-authorization evidence.

   2.  B2: Action agreement.  When the host record binds an action (via
       an action digest, a subject digest, or equivalent), the
       authorization artifact's action binding MUST agree with it.  An
       artifact authorizing a different action MUST invalidate the
       binding, not merely weaken it.

   3.  B3: Verified versus accepted.  Verifying the binding (digests and
       signatures hold) is distinct from accepting it (the relying party
       trusts the artifact's issuer via out-of-band pinned key
       material).  A verifier MUST report the two separately, and a
       binding from an unpinned issuer MUST NOT be accepted.  Discovery
       of issuer metadata, endpoints, credentials, or verification keys
       locates material but does not establish trust.  Acceptance
       requires a relying-party configured or independently verified
       trust root and the identifier semantics assigned to that issuer.

   4.  B4: Fail-closed absence.  The absence of a binding is the absence
       of evidence, never a default.  A relying party whose policy
       requires human authorization MUST treat an unbound or
       unresolvable binding as insufficient.  Absence becomes positive
       evidence only through a signed observed-absence statement naming
       the search performed.

   5.  B5: Consistency.  When a host record carries both forms, the
       embedded claim's canonical bytes MUST hash to the reference's
       digest; a mismatch invalidates both.





Schrock                 Expires 12 February 2027                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         Human-Authorization Binding           August 2026


   6.  B6: Authoritative approver attribution.  A valid signature proves
       control of a key; it does not by itself prove that the key holder
       is the named human.  The authorization artifact MUST carry or
       reference enrollment or identity evidence that binds the approver
       identifier and signing key under a trust root and identity
       profile accepted by the relying party.  A self-asserted name,
       self-issued key, workload identifier, or OAuth subject claim MUST
       NOT establish named-human identity by itself.

   7.  B7: Role non-equivalence.  A verifier MUST keep owner, delegator,
       terminal accountable authority, per-action human approver,
       logical agent, workload instance, OAuth client, executor, and
       target tool or action distinct.  When relying-party policy
       requires a relationship among those roles, the relationship MUST
       be separately verified.  If it is absent, malformed, stale, or
       not independently provable, the binding MUST be reported as
       insufficient or indeterminate, not accepted.

5.  Terminal Accountability Is Not Per-Action Human Authorization

   A delegation chain can terminate in a resolvable standing grant that
   names an accountable human or organizational authority without
   establishing that a human approved every action.  The accountable
   authority also need not be the initiating actor.  This distinction is
   independently expressed in the proposed IA-9(T) assessment overlay
   [MuraliBradleyIA9] and is essential for scheduled, monitoring, and
   remediation workloads that legitimately operate unattended.

   Where relying-party policy does not require per-action human
   approval, the terminal grant can support unattended operation and
   this binding need not be present.  Where policy does require per-
   action human approval, human_authorization or human_authorization_ref
   carries the separate named-human or quorum artifact bound to the
   exact action.  That artifact supplements the terminal grant; it does
   not replace the grant, identify the initiating actor, prove system
   ownership, or convert an organizational authority into a human
   approver.

6.  Mid-Execution Acquisition and Resource-Server Challenges

   Section 10.7 of [I-D.klrc-aiagent-auth] identifies a case in which an
   agent reaches a protected resource during execution and additional
   user authorization is required.  It describes CIBA and other
   authorization-server-mediated step-up mechanisms, and notes that
   additional work can be needed when the need for confirmation is
   discovered mid-execution.  This document does not replace those
   mechanisms or move the final authorization decision out of the
   authorization system selected by the deployment.



Schrock                 Expires 12 February 2027                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         Human-Authorization Binding           August 2026


   When the resource server discovers that evidence required by its
   policy is missing, stale, or unverifiable, it MAY return an
   Authorization Evidence Challenge [I-D.schrock-ae-challenge] bound to
   the exact action.  The challenge identifies the evidence requirement
   and supported presentation profiles.  It does not authorize the
   action, assert that a human approved it, transfer admission
   ownership, or establish trust in a discovered authorization server.

   The agent can then use CIBA, another native authorization mechanism,
   or a deployment-specific human-signing ceremony to obtain the
   required evidence.  Every returned artifact verifies under its own
   specification and trust model.  Where policy accepts an
   authorization-server-issued grant, that grant remains a separate
   evidence leg.  Where policy requires portable evidence of a named
   human's own act, the binding defined here carries that separate
   artifact.  In either case, the resource server MUST bind the returned
   evidence to the same material action and apply its current relying-
   party policy before admitting the action.

7.  Expression for SCITT Signed Statements

   Transparency-logged agent-action statements (SCITT [RFC9943]:
   capsules, permits, audit records) are the binding's most developed
   host family, and their expression is specified here concretely.  The
   reference form's digest is one of the following, selected per
   deployment and FIXED for a given host-statement profile so that both
   sides bind identical bytes:

   *  receipt_payload_digest — SHA-256 over the JCS canonical bytes of
      the authorization receipt's payload; used for offline composition,
      where the relying party holds or can fetch the receipt directly.

   *  statement_digest — SHA-256 over the COSE_Sign1 [RFC9052] bytes of
      the receipt expressed as a SCITT Signed Statement; RECOMMENDED
      when the receipt is registered in a transparency service, so the
      reference also resolves to a logged, inclusion-proofed entry.

   The COSE encoding of the receipt as a Signed Statement (canonical
   payload, content type) is the EP SCITT profile's job and out of scope
   here: this section specifies only the digest a host statement embeds
   and the verification that B1-B7 already require.  A host profile
   defines its own concrete carrier (a dedicated field, a capsule's
   opaque authority reference, a permit's authority context); this
   document mandates the digest semantics, never the carrier's name.
   The verifier obtains the receipt through whatever channel the
   deployment provides — held locally, conveyed with the statement, or
   fetched from the transparency service — and relies on digest
   equality, never on the channel.



Schrock                 Expires 12 February 2027                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         Human-Authorization Binding           August 2026


7.1.  Denial, Absence, and Observed Absence

   B4 (fail-closed absence) has one elaboration worth stating
   normatively for this host family, because settlement and audit flows
   rely on refusals as much as approvals.  Three states, only two of
   which are evidence: a DENIAL (a named human refused, an approval was
   revoked, or a validity window lapsed and the expiry was recorded) is
   a signed event, and a host statement MAY reference a denied
   authorization exactly as it references an approval — "an accountable
   human refused this action" is a positive, verifiable fact.  ABSENCE
   is not evidence and cannot be made so by assertion: the mere failure
   to present an authorization proves nothing.  Absence becomes positive
   evidence only through a signed OBSERVED-ABSENCE statement — an
   attestation that the verifier performed a defined search against
   defined sources at a stated time and found no qualifying
   authorization; it attests the search and its emptiness, never a
   universal negative.  A deterministic observed-absence vector ships
   with the reference implementation (examples/scitt/observed-absence-
   vector.mjs).

8.  Claim Naming

   The canonical claim names are "human_authorization_ref" and
   "human_authorization".  The claim was first deployed under the
   vendor-prefixed name "ep_human_authorization"; implementations SHOULD
   accept it and MUST treat it as an alias of the embedded form.  Host
   formats that already name their slot (an authority context, an actor,
   an approval reference) MAY carry the binding object under their own
   member name; the object's members, not the slot's name, are what this
   document defines.

9.  Security Considerations

   The slot is a target.  An attacker who can fill a host record's
   authorization slot chooses what a relying party later treats as the
   human's approval; every defense here exists for that reason.  B1
   removes assertion-only filling; B2 defeats splicing a genuine
   artifact from a different action (the confused-deputy case); B3
   prevents a self-issued artifact from being self-accepted; B4 prevents
   silence from being read as consent; B5 prevents the two forms from
   telling two stories; B6 prevents a self-asserted key, workload
   identifier, or OAuth subject from being relabeled as a named human;
   and B7 prevents owner, delegator, approver, workload, client,
   executor, and tool roles from being silently collapsed.  Discovery of
   metadata or keys cannot substitute for relying-party trust
   introduction.  Replay and one-time-use semantics belong to the
   authorization artifact and its enforcement point; a host record MUST
   NOT extend an artifact's validity by carrying it.  The reference form



Schrock                 Expires 12 February 2027                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         Human-Authorization Binding           August 2026


   additionally serves privacy: the named human travels only in the
   artifact, which can be withheld until a relying party with a need to
   know requires it — at the cost, by B4, of the evidence not counting
   until produced.

10.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.  Registration of the claim names
   in the JWT and CWT claims registries is anticipated for a future
   revision, after host-format feedback.

11.  References

11.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

   [RFC8785]  Rundgren, A., Jordan, B., and S. Erdtman, "JSON
              Canonicalization Scheme (JCS)", RFC 8785,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8785, June 2020,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8785>.

11.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.klrc-aiagent-auth]
              Kasselman, P., Lombardo, J., Rosomakho, Y., Campbell, B.,
              Steele, N., and A. Parecki, "AI Agent Authentication and
              Authorization", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-
              klrc-aiagent-auth-03, July 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-klrc-aiagent-
              auth/>.

   [I-D.schrock-ae-challenge]
              Schrock, I., "Authorization Evidence Challenge Protocol",
              Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-schrock-ae-
              challenge-06, August 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-schrock-ae-
              challenge/>.






Schrock                 Expires 12 February 2027                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         Human-Authorization Binding           August 2026


   [I-D.schrock-ep-authorization-receipts]
              Schrock, I., "Authorization Receipts for High-Risk Agent
              Actions", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-schrock-
              ep-authorization-receipts-11, July 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-schrock-ep-
              authorization-receipts/>.

   [I-D.schrock-ep-quorum]
              Schrock, I., "Multi-Party Human Authorization (EP-
              QUORUM)", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-schrock-
              ep-quorum-03, June 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-schrock-ep-
              quorum/>.

   [MuraliBradleyIA9]
              Murali, T. and B. B, "Identification, Authentication, and
              Delegated Authority for Non-Person Actors in AI Systems",
              Version 1.0, August 2026,
              <https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.21875505>.

   [RFC9052]  Schaad, J., "CBOR Object Signing and Encryption (COSE):
              Structures and Process", STD 96, RFC 9052,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9052, August 2022,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9052>.

   [RFC9943]  Birkholz, H., Delignat-Lavaud, A., Fournet, C., Deshpande,
              Y., and S. Lasker, "An Architecture for Trustworthy and
              Transparent Digital Supply Chains", RFC 9943,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9943, June 2026,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9943>.

Appendix A.  Host-Format Mappings (Informative)

   The following mappings describe, from each cited document's public
   text, where the binding fits.  They are informative, derived from the
   revisions named, and offered for the host authors to correct or
   adopt; absence of a format from this list implies nothing, and no
   mapping asserts a host author's endorsement.

   *  draft-mih-scitt-agent-action-capsule-01: a capsule whose
      disposition reports a human approver carries
      human_authorization_ref alongside the disposition; B2 binds it to
      the capsule's action digest.

   *  draft-munoz-scitt-permit-profile-00: the authority_context member
      carries the reference form; the permit's decision then rests on
      evidence, not assertion.




Schrock                 Expires 12 February 2027               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft         Human-Authorization Binding           August 2026


   *  draft-sharif-agent-audit-trail-00: the human_override field
      carries the reference form, giving the named-but-privacy-carved
      human an artifact rather than an inline identity.

   *  draft-bates-atp-00: a provenance node's actor field carries the
      reference form; validators add B1-B7 to lineage checks.

   *  draft-aylward-aiga-00: the reserved X.509v3 extension slot carries
      the reference digest, binding machine identity to the human
      authorization behind its issuance.

   *  draft-nelson-agent-delegation-receipts-10: a delegation receipt
      carries the embedded claim as a co-signing layer where multi-party
      approval is required (multi-party is out of the host's scope by
      its own statement).

   *  draft-rosenberg-aiproto-cheq-00: the confirmation object's
      signature, left TBD by the host, is the embedded claim; a quorum
      of confirmations aggregates under mode "quorum".

   *  draft-yossif-psea-02: a Verifier's attestation-result object (out
      of the host's scope) carries the reference form binding the
      presence proof to the authorization it evidenced.

   *  draft-kuehlewind-audit-architecture-00: the "signed grant" work
      item (WI-5) and step-up approval responses are instances of the
      embedded claim; Authorization Transition Records carry the
      reference form.

   *  The ACP (agent communication protocols) charter's "confirmation
      and evidence requirements for AI agent operations": the
      confirmation step's evidence is the embedded claim; scoped access
      tokens carry the reference form.

   *  SPICE-adjacent intent chains: the approval_ref member is the
      reference form's digest, giving the named field its missing
      semantics.

   One adjacent family fits differently and deserves saying precisely.
   WIMSE workload credentials (WIT/WIC, and the WPT request binding) do
   not reserve a human-authorization slot; their working group is
   deliberately chartered for workload identity and explicitly does not
   define personal identities.  They are, however, carry-capable: a WIT
   or transaction context is a JWT, and a deployment MAY carry
   human_authorization_ref as a claim alongside the workload identity.
   A deployment MUST keep the logical agent separate from the live
   workload instance that controls the current confirmation key, and
   MUST apply the grant-specific semantics of an OAuth subject rather



Schrock                 Expires 12 February 2027               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft         Human-Authorization Binding           August 2026


   than infer that it names a human.  The workload credential then
   proves the authenticated workload leg, while the bound artifact
   proves the named human's per-action authorization leg when policy
   requires it.  Neither leg by itself proves system ownership, a
   terminal accountable grant, or the relationship among owner,
   delegator, approver, executor, and target tool.  Those relationships
   require separate evidence under B7.

Appendix B.  Implementation Status

   The embedded claim profiles a shipped format (the EP receipt and
   quorum artifacts, three-language verifier suite with shared
   conformance vectors in one repository).  The binding checks (digest
   grounding, action agreement, verified-versus-accepted, fail-closed
   absence, embedded/reference consistency, authoritative approver
   attribution, and role non-equivalence) are exercised by the reference
   implementation's evidence-graph layer and by a deterministic binding
   vector published with the repository (examples/binding/human-
   authorization-binding-vector.mjs).  The vector includes negatives for
   action substitution, unpinned discovery, digest tampering, absent
   evidence, self-asserted identity, and enrolled-subject relabeling.

Author's Address

   Iman Schrock
   EMILIA Protocol, Inc.
   United States of America
   Email: team@emiliaprotocol.ai























Schrock                 Expires 12 February 2027               [Page 12]
