



Network Working Group                                         I. Schrock
Internet-Draft                                     EMILIA Protocol, Inc.
Intended status: Informational                              11 July 2026
Expires: 12 January 2027


     Authorization Evidence Chains: Composing Heterogeneous Agent-
                    Authorization Receipts (EP-AEC)
            draft-schrock-ep-authorization-evidence-chain-03

Abstract

   A growing family of Internet-Drafts defines signed "receipts" about
   an AI agent's action: delegation receipts that attest an agent was
   authorized to act for a principal, policy or permit receipts that
   attest a policy allowed an external effect, decision and compliance
   receipts, route authorizations, and human-authorization receipts that
   attest a named, accountable human approved a specific action.  The
   mature efforts independently converged on a common substrate: bind
   the action with a canonical digest (JSON Canonicalization Scheme, RFC
   8785) and sign it.  No specification, however, defines how a relying
   party verifies that, for one action, the several heterogeneous
   receipts it has been handed all bind the same canonical action and
   each verify under their own rules, yielding a single, offline, fail-
   closed ALLOW or DENY.  This document defines the Authorization
   Evidence Chain (EP-AEC): a transport-agnostic composition object and
   an offline verification algorithm that references existing receipts,
   checks that every component binds one canonical action digest,
   dispatches each component to a verifier for its type, and evaluates a
   fail-closed requirement expression.  EP-AEC introduces no new receipt
   type and replaces none; it is the verifier-side glue that lets
   independently specified receipts compose into one accountability
   decision.  A relying-party requirement and executor-computed expected
   action are mandatory before ALLOW; presenter labels are non-
   authoritative.  The built-in human legs require either a fresh,
   Class-A WebAuthn Trust Receipt under pinned identity, policy,
   audience, log, and registry inputs, or a fresh quorum under an exact
   pinned policy and approver directory.  This revision also profiles
   two optional component record types for that composition: the effect
   attestation, a post-execution record in which the executor signs the
   receipt identifier together with a digest of the observed effect, and
   ceremony evidence, a signed record of signing-ceremony telemetry (the
   challenge issued, viewed, and approved instants and the approver
   identity) that enables review-latency policies.







Schrock                  Expires 12 January 2027                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains            July 2026


Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 12 January 2027.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.1.  Scope and non-goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  The Authorization Evidence Chain object . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Relying-party acceptance inputs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   5.  Verification algorithm  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   6.  Requirement expressions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   7.  Whose requirement is it? (changed in -01) . . . . . . . . . .   8
   8.  The human-authorization leg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   9.  Effect Attestation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   10. Ceremony Evidence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   11. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   12. Relationship to Other Work  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   13. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   14. Changes in -03  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14



Schrock                  Expires 12 January 2027                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains            July 2026


   15. Implementation Status . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   16. Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   17. Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17

1.  Introduction

   As autonomous and semi-autonomous agents begin to take irreversible
   external actions -- moving funds, changing records, releasing data,
   invoking privileged APIs -- relying parties increasingly demand a
   verifiable artifact answering "was this exact action authorized, and
   by whom?"  The IETF community has responded with a cluster of receipt
   formats, each answering one facet:

   *  Identity -- who or what the agent is.

   *  Delegation -- that the agent was authorized to act for a principal
      (e.g. [DRP], [DAAP]).

   *  Policy or permit -- that policy permitted the effect before commit
      (e.g. [PERMIT], [AGENTROA]).

   *  Decision or compliance -- that a decision or compliance check
      occurred (e.g. [ACTA], [ASQAV]).

   *  Human authorization -- that a named, accountable human, or a
      quorum of distinct humans, approved the exact action
      ([EP-RECEIPTS], [EP-QUORUM]).

   *  Transparency -- that a statement was registered in an append-only
      log ([SCITT]).

   These are complementary layers, not competitors: a single high-risk
   action may warrant a delegation receipt AND a policy permit AND a
   human authorization.  Yet each effort defines only its own receipt.
   The relying party is left to correlate heterogeneous artifacts by
   hand, and in practice implementers hand-roll ad-hoc "composite
   proofs" with no shared correctness model -- in particular, no
   guarantee that the several receipts authorize the same action rather
   than different ones spliced together (a cross-binding attack).

   The Entity Attestation Token [RFC9711] provides a CBOR mechanism
   (detached submodules / detached EAT bundles) for composing claims
   from multiple attesting environments into one token.  No equivalent
   exists for the predominantly JSON/JCS receipt cluster described
   above.  This document fills that gap.





Schrock                  Expires 12 January 2027                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains            July 2026


1.1.  Scope and non-goals

   EP-AEC defines (1) a composition object that references component
   receipts and can record the presenter's descriptive requirement over
   them, and (2) an offline verification algorithm.  EP-AEC does NOT
   define any component receipt format, does not require any particular
   component to be present, and does not bless any component
   specification.  It is deliberately minimal: its only novel normative
   content is the same-action binding check and the requirement
   evaluation.

2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "SHOULD", and "MAY" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14 [RFC2119]
   [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown
   here.

   Action Object  the canonical representation of the external effect
      being authorized, as defined by [EP-RECEIPTS] Section 3.

   Canonical action digest  the SHA-256 digest of the JCS [RFC8785]
      serialization of the Action Object, expressed as lowercase
      hexadecimal, optionally prefixed "sha256:".  The Action Object
      MUST conform to the I-JSON [RFC7493] profile of [EP-RECEIPTS]
      Section 3 (strings, booleans, null, arrays, objects, and safe
      integers only) so that the digest is byte-identical across
      implementations.

   Component  one referenced receipt within a chain, carrying a type,
      the receipt evidence, and an optional human-readable label.

   Component verifier  a function that verifies one component and
      returns both a validity result AND the canonical action digest
      that component attests it authorized.

   Requirement  a Boolean expression over component types that
      determines ALLOW.

3.  The Authorization Evidence Chain object











Schrock                  Expires 12 January 2027                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains            July 2026


   {
     "@version": "EP-AEC-v1",
     "action": { ... Action Object ... },
     "action_digest": "sha256:<hex>",
     "components": [
       { "type": "ep-quorum",
         "label": "two-person human authorization",
         "evidence": { ... EP-QUORUM-v1 object ... } },
       { "type": "policy-permit",
         "label": "machine policy permit",
         "evidence": { ... permit receipt ... } },
       { "type": "delegation",
         "label": "agent delegation",
         "evidence": { ... delegation receipt ... } }
     ],
     "requirement": "ep-quorum AND policy-permit"
   }

   *  "@version" (string, REQUIRED) -- MUST be "EP-AEC-v1".

   *  "action" (object, REQUIRED) -- the Action Object every component
      must authorize.

   *  "action_digest" (string, OPTIONAL) -- if present, MUST equal the
      canonical action digest recomputed from "action"; a mismatch is a
      fatal error.

   *  "components" (array, REQUIRED, non-empty) -- each has "type"
      (string), "evidence" (object), and optional "label" (string).
      Labels are display metadata and MUST NOT satisfy a requirement
      identifier.

   *  "requirement" (string, OPTIONAL) -- a Boolean expression
      (Section 6).  NOTE (changed in -01): this member is PRESENTER-
      SUPPLIED -- a claim of what the chain satisfies, never the relying
      party's sufficiency bar; see Section 7.  Its absence has no effect
      on ALLOW when the verifier has an out-of-band relying-party
      requirement.

   The chain carries the Action Object once; components reference the
   same action by digest rather than re-embedding it.  This is what
   makes the same-action binding check possible and is the heart of the
   format.








Schrock                  Expires 12 January 2027                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains            July 2026


4.  Relying-party acceptance inputs

   Internal agreement among presenter-supplied artifacts is
   verification, not acceptance.  Before returning ALLOW, the verifier
   MUST receive the following values from relying-party-controlled
   configuration:

   *  the requirement expression;

   *  the expected action digest computed from the action the executor
      is actually about to perform;

   *  an explicit verification time; and

   *  for each built-in human component, the acceptance profile
      described in Section 8.

   If the expected action digest is absent, malformed, or differs from
   the canonical digest of C.action, the verifier MUST return DENY.  The
   expected digest MUST NOT be taken from C or any component in C.

5.  Verification algorithm

   A verifier is configured with a set of component verifiers keyed by
   type.  Given a chain C, the verifier MUST proceed fail-closed:

   1.  If C is malformed (missing "@version", wrong version, missing or
       non-object "action", or empty "components"), or exceeds the
       implementation's documented depth, node, component, expression,
       or string-byte limits, return DENY.

   2.  Compute chain_digest = canonical action digest of C.action.  If
       C.action_digest is present and does not equal chain_digest,
       return DENY.

   3.  Compare chain_digest to the expected action digest supplied by
       the relying party.  If the expected digest is absent or differs,
       return DENY.

   4.  For each component k:

       1.  If no verifier is registered for k.type, mark k unsatisfied
           (reason: no verifier) and continue.

       2.  Invoke the verifier on k.evidence.  It returns valid and
           action_digest.  Any exception marks k unsatisfied.





Schrock                  Expires 12 January 2027                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains            July 2026


       3.  k is SATISFIED iff valid is true AND the returned
           action_digest equals chain_digest.  A valid component that
           binds a different action MUST be treated as unsatisfied
           (reason: binds a different action).  This is the cross-
           binding defense.

       4.  If satisfied, add k.type to the satisfied set. k.label MUST
           NOT be added; it is presenter-controlled display metadata.

   5.  Evaluate only the requirement supplied by the relying party over
       the satisfied set (Section 6).  If no relying-party requirement
       was supplied, return DENY.  C.requirement MAY be evaluated for
       descriptive reporting but MUST NOT produce ALLOW.  Record
       requirement_source accordingly.

   6.  Return ALLOW iff the relying-party requirement evaluates true and
       every acceptance input in Section 4 passed; otherwise return
       DENY.

   7.  Any unexpected error at any step MUST yield DENY.

   The result SHOULD include, per component, whether it verified and
   whether it was bound, with a reason for any failure, to support
   audit.

   Two optional component record types, the effect attestation
   (Section 9) and ceremony evidence (Section 10), attach additional
   evidence rules on top of step 3.  Findings from those rules are
   conflict-class: they never move the outcome toward ALLOW, and in the
   graded verdict set used by the reference evaluation (admissible,
   missing_evidence, stale, conflicted, unverifiable) they downgrade the
   verdict to "conflicted".  A record whose signature does not verify is
   "unverifiable", which is strictly worse and is never softened to
   "conflicted".  No rule in this document ever moves a verdict toward a
   more admissible one.

6.  Requirement expressions

   A requirement is a Boolean expression with the grammar:

   expr := term (('AND' | 'OR') term)*
   term := '(' expr ')' | IDENT

   IDENT matches a component type in the satisfied set; an unknown
   identifier evaluates to false.  Implementations MUST evaluate the
   expression with a bounded parser and MUST NOT use a general-purpose
   evaluator.  AND and OR have EQUAL binding strength and are evaluated
   strictly left to right; implementations MUST NOT assume AND binds



Schrock                  Expires 12 January 2027                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains            July 2026


   tighter than OR.  Parentheses group explicitly and are the only
   precedence mechanism.  Example: "ep-quorum AND (policy-permit OR
   delegation)" requires a human quorum plus either a policy permit or a
   delegation receipt, all bound to the same action.

7.  Whose requirement is it? (changed in -01)

   The chain document's "requirement" member is supplied by the
   PRESENTER of the chain.  A presenter must never be able to choose its
   own sufficiency bar: a chain that says "delegation" satisfies itself,
   however weak, if the verifier takes the document's word for what
   suffices.  This is the same confused-deputy class as a quorum policy
   read from the object it governs.

   Accordingly: a verifier MUST accept a requirement expression supplied
   out-of-band by the RELYING PARTY.  The document's member is treated
   as a recorded claim only and MUST NOT produce ALLOW.  The result MUST
   record which source was evaluated (requirement_source:
   "relying_party" or "presenter"), and SHOULD note when a presenter
   requirement was ignored in favor of a pinned one.  The document
   member is OPTIONAL descriptive metadata; omission MUST NOT weaken,
   replace, or prevent evaluation of the out-of-band relying-party
   requirement.  If no relying-party requirement is supplied, the
   verifier MUST return DENY whether or not the document member is
   present.  The reference implementations (JavaScript, Python, Go)
   implement this behavior and agree on shared conformance vectors
   covering both sources, including
   reject_presenter_weak_bar_rp_bar_unsatisfied in the EP-AEC-ROLE-v1
   suite, where the presenter's weak bar would pass and the relying
   party's pinned bar correctly fails.

   The generalization of this principle -- the entire sufficiency policy
   (requirement, freshness, revocation, required bindings) supplied by
   the relying party, with a purpose-relative classified verdict -- is
   specified in [I-D.schrock-ep-action-evidence-graph].

8.  The human-authorization leg

   Of the receipt families enumerated in Section 1, only the EP human-
   authorization receipt binds a named, accountable human (or, via
   [EP-QUORUM], a quorum of distinct humans under separation of duties)
   to the exact action.  Several policy/permit formats reserve a slot
   for a threshold or multi-party signature but specify no human
   semantics behind it.  EP-AEC lets a relying party require the human
   leg explicitly (e.g. requirement includes "ep-quorum") while
   composing it with machine-side delegation and permit receipts.  The
   built-in component verifiers "ep-quorum" and "ep-receipt" are defined
   by [EP-QUORUM] and [EP-RECEIPTS] respectively; all other types are



Schrock                  Expires 12 January 2027                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains            July 2026


   supplied by the relying party.

   A generic operator signature is not a human ceremony.  The "ep-
   receipt" built-in MUST accept only the Trust Receipt of [EP-RECEIPTS]
   Section 6.2 under a relying-party profile that pins the approver
   directory, Class-A key class, expected WebAuthn RP ID, an exact
   allowlist of accepted signed WebAuthn client-data origins, policy
   hash, log key, maximum evidence age, verification time, and a fresh
   registry snapshot.  Every counted signoff MUST carry WebAuthn user
   presence and user verification and bind the pinned approver identity.
   A bare Ed25519 operator envelope MUST be unsatisfied for this type.

   The "ep-quorum" built-in MUST compare the presented quorum policy
   byte-for-byte to the relying-party-pinned policy and MUST pin the RP
   ID, an exact allowlist of accepted signed WebAuthn client-data
   origins, signed context policy, maximum evidence age, and each key-
   to-approver-to-role mapping.  A safety-critical quorum profile MUST
   require at least two distinct humans.  Ordered mode MUST require the
   signed predecessor chain defined by [EP-QUORUM].  An internally valid
   quorum under presenter-supplied keys or a weaker presenter-supplied
   policy is unsatisfied.

   For both built-ins, the relying-party directory snapshot MUST have an
   authenticated checked-at instant and maximum staleness.  A key that
   is inactive, outside its validity window, revoked at the verification
   time, or absent from that fresh snapshot MUST be unsatisfied.

9.  Effect Attestation

   Every receipt family enumerated in Section 1 attests something about
   an action before or at authorization time.  None of them states what
   was then done.  An effect attestation is a post-execution evidence
   record that closes that "approved X, executed Y" gap: the executor
   signs the receipt identifier of the authorization it acted under
   together with a digest of the effect it observed.  Any third party
   holding both the authorization (which commits to the approved effect)
   and the effect attestation can check divergence offline: if the
   observed effect digest differs from the approved action's committed
   effect digest, "approved X, executed Y" is demonstrated by the two
   records alone, with no access to the executing system, and in the
   evidence verdict the divergence surfaces as a conflict.

   Use of this record type is OPTIONAL.  Its component type identifier
   is "effect_attestation".  When it is used, the following rules apply:

   *  The record MUST carry the receipt identifier of the authorization
      it attests and the digest of the observed effect, and MUST be
      signed by the executor.  The component verifier for this type



Schrock                  Expires 12 January 2027                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains            July 2026


      returns, alongside "valid" and "action_digest", the fields
      "receipt_id", "observed_effect_digest", and, where the verifier
      could read the approved effect out of the referenced
      authorization, "committed_effect_digest".  Digest values are
      compared as lowercase hexadecimal after removal of an optional
      "sha256:" prefix.

   *  An effect attestation whose executor signature does not verify, or
      whose executor key is not pinned by the relying party, is
      inadmissible as evidence: the component verifier MUST report it
      invalid, and it MUST NOT be weighed as effect evidence at all
      (fail closed).

   *  The committed effect digest against which the observed digest is
      compared MUST NOT be taken from the presenter.  It is either
      pinned by the relying party (the "expected_effect_digest" member
      of the relying-party policy) or read by the component verifier
      from the referenced authorization; where both are available, the
      relying-party pin takes precedence.

   *  If the observed effect digest differs from the committed effect
      digest, the verification result MUST record the reason code
      "effect_divergence" and treat the finding as a conflict
      (Section 5); it never moves the outcome toward ALLOW.

   *  A verified effect attestation that carries no observed effect
      digest MUST likewise be recorded under "effect_divergence" and
      treated as a conflict (fail closed).

   *  A verified effect attestation with no committed effect digest to
      compare against MUST record the reason code
      "effect_commitment_missing" and be treated as a conflict, never as
      admissible: an observed effect that cannot be tied to an approved
      effect does not show the effect was approved (fail closed).

   Stated honestly: an effect attestation says what the executor CLAIMS
   was observed.  It is one more accountable, signed leg in the chain,
   not ground truth.  Its value is that an executor that misreports the
   effect is now misreporting in a signed, attributable artifact bound
   to a specific receipt, and that a divergence between two honest
   records is checkable offline by any third party holding both.  How
   the observed effect is represented and digested is action-family
   specific and out of scope for this document.








Schrock                  Expires 12 January 2027               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains            July 2026


10.  Ceremony Evidence

   A human-authorization receipt proves that an accountable human
   approved the exact action.  It does not show how the approval
   happened.  Ceremony evidence carries signing-ceremony telemetry as a
   first-class evidence record: the instants at which the authorization
   challenge was issued, viewed, and approved, and the approver
   identity.  Its component type identifier is "ceremony_evidence"; the
   component verifier for this type returns, alongside "valid" and
   "action_digest", the fields "approver", "issued_at", "viewed_at", and
   "approved_at".  The component verifier proves the ceremony record is
   authentic; the rules below judge what it says.

   Ceremony evidence enables review-latency policies.  An approval that
   comes in below a policy floor every time is itself evidence of
   rubber-stamping: the recorded human review contradicts a genuine one,
   and a relying party MAY weigh it as a conflict.  A relying party
   adopting such a policy sets a review-latency floor (the
   "ceremony_min_review_sec" member of the relying-party policy).  When
   a floor is set, the following rules apply:

   *  The review interval of a verified ceremony record is "approved_at"
      minus "viewed_at", in whole seconds.

   *  A verified ceremony record whose review interval is strictly below
      the floor MUST be recorded under the reason code
      "rubber_stamped_ceremony" and treated as a conflict (Section 5);
      it never moves the outcome toward ALLOW.

   *  If the telemetry on a verified ceremony record is absent or
      unusable (a missing or unparseable "viewed_at" or "approved_at",
      or "approved_at" earlier than "viewed_at"), real review cannot be
      shown; the record MUST be recorded under the reason code
      "ceremony_telemetry_missing" and treated as a conflict, never as a
      silent pass (fail closed).

   *  A ceremony record whose signature does not verify is unverifiable;
      it is never softened to a conflict.

   When no floor is set, this document attaches no judgment to the
   telemetry.  Stated honestly: ceremony telemetry is operator-
   originated.  The issued, viewed, and approved instants are recorded
   by the operator of the signing ceremony, not by an independent
   observer; ceremony evidence gives the relying party an accountable,
   signed record of the claimed timeline, not an independent measurement
   of human attention.





Schrock                  Expires 12 January 2027               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains            July 2026


11.  Security Considerations

   Presenter-chosen sufficiency (fixed in -01).  Prior to this revision
   the requirement was read only from the presented document, letting a
   presenter select the bar its own evidence would be judged against.
   Section "Whose requirement is it? (changed in -01)" closes this:
   relying-party-supplied requirements take precedence and the evaluated
   source is recorded.  Deployments of -00 verifiers SHOULD upgrade or
   wrap verification with an out-of-band requirement check.

   Presenter-chosen action.  Component agreement proves only that the
   components agree with each other.  Without an executor-owned expected
   action, a presenter can construct a perfectly consistent chain for a
   different action.  The relying party MUST compute the expected digest
   from the action at its own enforcement point and verification MUST
   fail closed when that input is absent.

   Cross-binding (action substitution).  The core threat is splicing
   receipts that authorize different actions into one chain.  Step 3c of
   Section 5 defeats this by requiring every satisfied component to
   attest the chain's exact canonical digest.  The strength of this
   defense rests entirely on the canonical digest being byte-identical
   across implementations; the I-JSON profile ([EP-RECEIPTS] Section 3)
   is therefore normative, and one restriction in it is load-bearing
   enough to restate here: canonical payloads MUST NOT contain non-
   integer numbers (amounts travel as strings).  Within that restriction
   the reference canonicalizers coincide with RFC 8785 output; full RFC
   8785 number serialization (for payloads outside the profile) is an
   open conformance item, and implementations MUST reject payloads
   containing non-integer numbers rather than guess.

   Component verifier trust.  A chain is only as sound as its weakest
   registered verifier and the keys it trusts.  Relying parties MUST
   configure verifiers and trust anchors explicitly; an unconfigured
   type is unsatisfied, never assumed.  Implementations MUST NOT allow
   application-supplied verifiers to replace the reserved "ep-receipt"
   or "ep-quorum" built-ins.  An execution service MUST pin its custom
   verifier registry and verifier trust keys before it accepts a
   presented chain.  It MUST NOT accept verifier code, trust keys, or
   human-acceptance profiles in the same transaction as presenter-
   controlled evidence; doing so lets the presenter define the proof
   that its own evidence must pass.

   Label and key-role confusion.  Component labels are supplied by the
   presenter and MUST remain display-only.  Human acceptance MUST be
   derived from the typed built-in verifier and its relying-party
   profile, not from a label, a key named inside the evidence, or a key
   trusted for another component type.



Schrock                  Expires 12 January 2027               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains            July 2026


   WebAuthn origin confusion.  Matching the authenticator-data RP ID
   hash is necessary but does not constrain the origin carried in the
   signed client data.  A built-in human leg MUST decode the signed
   clientDataJSON, require a syntactically valid origin string, and
   compare it for exact membership in a non-empty relying-party
   allowlist.  The allowlist MUST NOT be taken from the presented
   receipt or quorum.  A missing or mismatched origin is unsatisfied.

   Requirement under-specification.  A weak requirement yields a weak
   decision.  Requirements SHOULD name every leg the relying party
   depends on, including the human leg where accountability is required.

   Freshness and revocation.  EP-AEC composes point-in-time evidence; it
   does not by itself prove the absence of a later revocation.  An ALLOW
   decision using either built-in human leg MUST use an explicit
   verification time, a relying-party maximum age, and a fresh
   authenticated registry snapshot.  Offline historical verification
   without those inputs MAY report cryptographic validity but MUST NOT
   return ALLOW.

   One-time execution is stateful.  An offline ALLOW says that the
   evidence satisfied the relying party's inputs at a stated instant; it
   cannot prove that another executor has not already acted on the same
   authorization.  A consequential executor MUST place a shared, atomic
   consumption store in the execution path, reserve the stable executor-
   computed action digest before the effect, and commit or
   conservatively freeze that reservation after the effect begins.  The
   canonical action MUST therefore include a unique action-instance
   identifier or nonce whenever two otherwise identical effects may be
   independently authorized.  Consumption MUST NOT be keyed by a
   presenter-selected component identifier: an invalid decoy component
   or an alternate valid proof could otherwise create a fresh replay
   key.  A storage outage, ambiguous commit, or unavailable durable
   decision log MUST refuse or freeze execution; it MUST NOT fall back
   to an in-memory or stateless path.  A committed consumption key MUST
   NOT expire while the action could be presented again.  A production
   decision log MUST continue one atomically advanced shared head across
   replicas and restarts; a process-local hash chain streamed to a sink
   does not satisfy this requirement because it can fork or restart from
   genesis.  A successful append response MUST be followed by immediate
   readback of the exact submitted sequence, predecessor, record
   identifier, and canonical content.  The execution service MUST
   independently recompute the returned record hash and compare its non-
   chain fields exactly to the requested decision before acting.  A
   backend that reports success without making the record observable
   creates an indeterminate outcome and execution MUST remain refused or
   frozen.




Schrock                  Expires 12 January 2027               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains            July 2026


   Execution binding has a host-language boundary.  An executor SHOULD
   clone and make immutable the expected Action Object before the first
   asynchronous storage or logging operation, and SHOULD pass only that
   snapshot to the effect adapter.  This closes mutation-after-
   verification races inside the enforcement process.  The effect
   adapter and every path to the physical or external effect remain part
   of the trusted computing base; EP-AEC cannot stop a privileged
   adapter from executing a different operation outside the gate.

   No transport assumptions.  EP-AEC is a data structure; it inherits
   the confidentiality and integrity properties of whatever conveys it.
   It is fail-closed by construction (Section 5).

   Post-execution and ceremony evidence are operator-originated.  The
   effect attestation (Section 9) and ceremony evidence (Section 10)
   records carry what the executor and the ceremony operator report,
   signed and attributable, not an independent measurement.  Their
   guarantee is accountability, not ground truth: a false report is a
   signed, bound artifact, and a divergence or below-floor review is
   checkable offline.  Both are fail-closed in the same direction as the
   rest of this document: a signature that does not verify is
   unverifiable, a missing committed effect or missing ceremony
   telemetry is a conflict, and no finding from either record ever moves
   a verdict toward a more admissible one (Section 5).

12.  Relationship to Other Work

   EP-AEC is complementary to, and composes, the efforts in Section 1.
   It is the JSON/JCS analogue of the EAT [RFC9711] detached-bundle
   composition model and can itself be registered as a SCITT [SCITT]
   signed statement for transparency.  It neither extends nor constrains
   [DRP], [PERMIT], [ACTA], or [AGENTROA]; each plugs in as a component
   type.

13.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.  A future revision may request a
   media type (e.g. "application/ep-aec+json") and a registry of
   component type identifiers should the work be adopted.

14.  Changes in -03

   *  Made the relying-party requirement and executor-computed expected
      action mandatory acceptance inputs.







Schrock                  Expires 12 January 2027               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains            July 2026


   *  Made presenter labels display-only and reserved the built-in human
      component verifiers against application override; stateful
      execution pins custom verifier and key registries before
      transaction input.

   *  Profiled the human legs as a fresh Class-A Trust Receipt or an
      exact distinct-human quorum under relying-party-pinned policy,
      audience, signed WebAuthn origin allowlist, identity-role
      directory, and active registry snapshot.

   *  Added bounded parsing, canonical-JSON resource limits, and fail-
      closed host-language exception handling requirements.

   *  Specified action-digest-keyed one-time execution, non-expiring
      committed keys, conservative indeterminate outcomes, immutable
      action snapshots, and atomic shared-head decision logging across
      replicas and restarts with exact successful-append readback and
      independently checked logger acknowledgments.

15.  Implementation Status

   A reference verifier and a runnable demonstration (composing a real
   EP human quorum with a policy-permit leg, and rejecting both a cross-
   binding attack and a missing human leg; examples/authorization-
   chain.mjs in the repository) are maintained as open-source software
   and are exercised offline, with no network dependency, by the
   reference suite's three language implementations (JavaScript, Python,
   Go), which agree on a shared conformance vector set.  These are one
   project's implementations -- a cross-language consistency check, not
   independently developed implementations; a third party has separately
   executed and verified the published artifacts against a pinned
   commit, as reported to the IETF SECDISPATCH mailing list on 23 June
   2026.

   The evidence rules for the effect-attestation and ceremony-evidence
   record types (Section 9, Section 10) are implemented in a JavaScript-
   only reference evaluation in the same repository; they are not yet
   part of the shared cross-language conformance vector set.

16.  Normative References

   [EP-QUORUM]
              Schrock, I., "Multi-Party Quorum Authorization for High-
              Risk Agent Actions (EP-QUORUM)", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-schrock-ep-quorum, June 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-schrock-ep-
              quorum/>.




Schrock                  Expires 12 January 2027               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains            July 2026


   [EP-RECEIPTS]
              Schrock, I., "Authorization Receipts for High-Risk Agent
              Actions (EP)", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-
              schrock-ep-authorization-receipts-06, July 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-schrock-ep-
              authorization-receipts/>.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC7493]  Bray, T., Ed., "The I-JSON Message Format", RFC 7493,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7493, March 2015,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7493>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

   [RFC8785]  Rundgren, A., Jordan, B., and S. Erdtman, "JSON
              Canonicalization Scheme (JCS)", RFC 8785,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8785, June 2020,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8785>.

17.  Informative References

   [ACTA]     Farley, A., "Signed Decision Receipts for Machine-to-
              Machine Access Control", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft,
              draft-farley-acta-signed-receipts, 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-farley-acta-
              signed-receipts/>.

   [AGENTROA] Nivalto, "Agent Route Origin Authorization (AgentROA)",
              Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-nivalto-agentroa-
              route-authorization, 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-nivalto-agentroa-
              route-authorization/>.

   [ASQAV]    Marques, J., "Compliance Profile of Signed Action Receipts
              for AI Agents", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-
              marques-asqav-compliance-receipts, 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-marques-asqav-
              compliance-receipts/>.







Schrock                  Expires 12 January 2027               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft        Authorization Evidence Chains            July 2026


   [DAAP]     Mishra, "Delegated Agent Authorization Protocol (DAAP)",
              Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-mishra-oauth-
              agent-grants, 2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/
              draft-mishra-oauth-agent-grants/>.

   [DRP]      Nelson, R., "Delegation Receipt Protocol for AI Agent
              Authorization", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-
              nelson-agent-delegation-receipts, 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-nelson-agent-
              delegation-receipts/>.

   [I-D.schrock-ep-action-evidence-graph]
              Schrock, I., "Action Evidence Graphs and Evidence Policy
              Replay for High-Risk Agent Actions (EP-AEG)", Work in
              Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-schrock-ep-action-
              evidence-graph-00, July 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-schrock-ep-action-
              evidence-graph/>.

   [PERMIT]   Lee, Y., "Permit Receipts for Permit-Before-Commit
              Authorization of AI-Agent and Workload External Effects",
              Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-lee-orprg-permit-
              receipts, 2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-
              lee-orprg-permit-receipts/>.

   [RFC9711]  Lundblade, L., Mandyam, G., O'Donoghue, J., and C.
              Wallace, "The Entity Attestation Token (EAT)", RFC 9711,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9711, April 2025,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9711>.

   [SCITT]    IETF SCITT WG, "An Architecture for Trustworthy and
              Transparent Digital Supply Chains", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-scitt-architecture, 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-scitt-
              architecture/>.

Author's Address

   Iman Schrock
   EMILIA Protocol, Inc.
   United States of America
   Email: team@emiliaprotocol.ai









Schrock                  Expires 12 January 2027               [Page 17]
