



Network Working Group                                         I. Schrock
Internet-Draft                                     EMILIA Protocol, Inc.
Intended status: Informational                            10 August 2026
Expires: 11 February 2027


    An Authorization Evidence Challenge for High-Risk Agent Actions
                     draft-schrock-ae-challenge-07

Abstract

   When a relying party refuses a consequential agent action because
   authorization evidence is missing, stale, or unverifiable, the agent
   needs a machine-readable description of what remains necessary.  This
   document defines a transport-neutral Authorization Evidence Challenge
   data model bound to the relying party's exact action.  The challenge
   identifies outstanding evidence requirements, freshness and status
   constraints, acceptable presentation profiles, and retry state.  It
   authorizes nothing, transfers no admission ownership, and provides no
   promise that a later request will execute.

   The document also defines an HTTP challenge-response carrier using
   403 Forbidden and RFC 9457 Problem Details, and describes an
   informative gateway-handoff illustration for DMSC-style federation.
   The gateway illustration communicates evidence requirements; it does
   not solve conserved admission or double-admission across
   independently operated gateways.

   A challenge can synchronize corrected retries and amplify load.  The
   core therefore defines optional retry timing with per-challenge
   jitter, and the HTTP carrier maps its lower bound to Retry-After.
   Retry timing controls presentation attempts only; it does not
   authorize the action or make an uncertain action safe to repeat.

   Single-use processing also places state on the refusal path.  The
   core therefore requires bounded outstanding and replay state, fail-
   closed behavior when state cannot be claimed, and retention of live
   replay records until they are no longer security-relevant.  Nonce
   claim and refusal-path capacity reservation are one atomic owner-side
   transition before native evidence verification, and a binding
   capacity refusal reveals no remaining evidence requirements.  In a
   sharded replay domain, only the authoritative owner can classify a
   nonce as already claimed; inability to reach that owner is
   unavailability, not replay.







Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 11 February 2027.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.1.  Boundary with OAuth Transaction Authorization . . . . . .   3
     1.2.  Requirements Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     1.3.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   2.  Transport-Neutral Core Data Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     2.1.  Required Members and JSON Types . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.2.  Action and Policy Binding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.3.  Evidence Requirements and Presentation  . . . . . . . . .   9
     2.4.  Validation and Resource Limits  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     2.5.  Lifecycle, Replay, and Retry  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     2.6.  State Bounds and Exhaustion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
       2.6.1.  State Exhaustion Conformance Cases  . . . . . . . . .  19
       2.6.2.  Reference Evidence Boundary . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
     2.7.  Extensibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
     2.8.  Carrier Semantics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   3.  HTTP Challenge Response Carrier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
     3.1.  OAuth Non-Substitution Conformance Case . . . . . . . . .  25
   4.  Informative DMSC Gateway Illustration . . . . . . . . . . . .  26



Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


     4.1.  Illustrative Gateway Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  30
   7.  Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  30
   8.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  31
   9.  Changes since -06 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  31
   10. Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  32
   11. Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  34
   Appendix A.  Relationship to Existing Mechanisms  . . . . . . . .  35
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  36

1.  Introduction

   Evidence formats describe artifacts such as receipts, permits,
   attestations, and logs.  They do not by themselves define the live
   interaction that follows when a relying party finds the presented
   evidence insufficient.  Without a common challenge, each agent
   protocol invents its own vocabulary for missing evidence, acceptable
   presentations, freshness, status checking, and retry.

   This document defines the challenge as an application data model,
   independent of HTTP, a particular agent protocol, and any one
   evidence format.  OAuth step-up authentication [RFC9470] lets a
   resource identify stronger authentication requirements.  OAuth
   Transaction Authorization Challenge [OAUTH-TXN-CHALLENGE] is an
   example of a signed, OAuth-specific challenge that an authorization
   server can turn into a transaction-bound access token after obtaining
   any required approval.  AE-CHALLENGE does not replace either
   mechanism.  It describes missing authorization evidence for an exact
   proposed action when an application needs a transport-neutral
   evidence-negotiation object.

   A challenge is a refusal with information.  It is not an
   authorization decision, reservation, capability, ownership transfer,
   or promise of execution.  Satisfying it causes the relying party to
   evaluate a new presentation under its live local policy.

1.1.  Boundary with OAuth Transaction Authorization

   When local policy requires a transaction-specific native OAuth grant,
   an implementation MUST complete the applicable native OAuth flow.  It
   MUST NOT substitute an AE-CHALLENGE, its nonce, or a successfully
   presented evidence object for that native challenge, its transaction
   identifier or equivalent correlation value, the authorization-server
   decision, or the resulting access token.  Satisfying AE-CHALLENGE
   never satisfies a native OAuth grant requirement.





Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   AE-CHALLENGE remains applicable outside OAuth and when a relying
   party needs evidence that a native authorization protocol does not
   itself negotiate, such as a current status proof, quorum receipt,
   hardware attestation, or separately verified policy artifact.  An
   OAuth application profile MAY carry or reference both mechanisms, but
   that profile MUST define their exact action and audience join, which
   challenge is primary for each refusal, and how native grant state
   remains separate from AE-CHALLENGE replay state.  Without such a
   profile, the mechanisms are separate and neither is silently
   converted into the other.

   The single-use property in this document applies only to one
   evidence-presentation attempt under an AE-CHALLENGE nonce.  It does
   not consume an OAuth transaction, invalidate an access token, reserve
   an action, or establish one-time admission at an executor.

1.2.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

1.3.  Terminology

   Relying party:  The component that decides whether evidence satisfies
      its requirements for a proposed action.

   Presenter:  The agent, gateway, or other component that receives a
      challenge and may later present evidence.

   Exact action:  The relying-party-derived material action that would
      be admitted, including every field its selected action profile
      treats as consequential.

   Challenge:  A single-use, expiring description of evidence still
      required for one exact action.

   Claim:  The authoritative transition that assigns one challenge nonce
      to one structurally valid, exact-action presentation attempt.  A
      successful claim consumes the challenge even if later evidence or
      policy evaluation refuses the action.

   Consumed challenge:  A challenge whose nonce has been claimed.
      Consumption does not mean that evidence was sufficient, that the
      action was authorized, or that any external effect was attempted.




Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


2.  Transport-Neutral Core Data Model

   The AE-CHALLENGE-v1 data model is independent of its carrier.  A
   transport binding MUST preserve every member that the relying party
   uses when registering or reconstructing and later consuming the
   challenge.  A binding MUST also provide authenticated integrity and
   peer identification, or carry the challenge in an authenticated
   envelope that provides those properties.

   The JSON format defined by [RFC8259] is the reference serialization
   of the core model.  A non-JSON binding MUST define an unambiguous
   mapping to the same members and value types.

   {
     "@version": "AE-CHALLENGE-v1",
     "challenge_id": "7a3120d1-65b4-4d1a-85d4-9128adf76b41",
     "nonce": "ABEiM0RVZneImaq7zN3u_w",
     "action_digest": "sha256:aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa",
     "action_profile": "https://example.net/action/payment-v3",
     "audience": "https://gateway-a.example",
     "policy_id": "https://gateway-b.example/policies/high-risk-v4",
     "policy_digest": "sha256:bbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbb",
     "required_evidence": [
       {
         "requirement_id": "human-approval",
         "type": "https://example.net/e/authorization-receipt",
         "profiles": ["https://example.net/profiles/receipt-v1"],
         "max_age_sec": 300,
         "status": "current"
       }
     ],
     "present_as": ["https://example.net/p/ep-aec-v1"],
     "obtain_hints": [
       {
         "requirement_id": "human-approval",
         "mechanism": "https://example.net/flows/approval-v1",
         "uri": "https://approver.example/tasks/123"
       }
     ],
     "retry_timing": {
       "not_before": "2026-08-09T23:50:30Z",
       "jitter_sec": 20
     },
     "expires_at": "2026-08-10T00:05:00Z"
   }






Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


2.1.  Required Members and JSON Types

   A core challenge MUST contain @version, challenge_id, nonce,
   action_digest, action_profile, audience, policy_id, policy_digest,
   required_evidence, present_as, and expires_at.  The obtain_hints,
   retry_timing, and critical members are OPTIONAL.  A member defined as
   an array MUST be a JSON array, not a scalar promoted by the
   recipient.

   challenge_id and audience are non-empty JSON strings. nonce has the
   syntax defined in Section 2.2.  The binding or profile defines the
   audience identifier namespace and comparison rule. action_profile and
   policy_id are absolute-URI strings. action_digest and policy_digest
   use the case-sensitive form sha256: followed by 64 lowercase
   hexadecimal digits using SHA-256 as defined by [RFC6234].  The action
   profile defines the canonical action bytes hashed for action_digest.
   The relying party defines a deterministic representation of its local
   policy for policy_digest; the digest identifies the policy state that
   produced the challenge and does not transfer that policy to the
   presenter.

   Each required_evidence element is a JSON object whose required
   requirement_id and type members are strings.  If present, profiles
   and proof_predicates are non-empty arrays of unique absolute-URI
   strings, max_age_sec is a non-negative integer, and status is a non-
   empty string.  This document defines current; a recipient refuses any
   other status value unless an applicable profile defines it.

   If present, obtain_hints is an array of JSON objects.  Each object
   MUST contain string requirement_id, mechanism, and uri members;
   mechanism and uri are absolute URIs.  If present, retry_timing is a
   JSON object with the members and types defined in Section 2.5.  If
   present, critical is an array of unique non-empty JSON strings
   governed by Section 2.7.

2.2.  Action and Policy Binding

   @version MUST equal AE-CHALLENGE-v1.  A recipient that does not
   implement this version MUST refuse automated processing.

   challenge_id is a non-empty opaque correlation identifier.
   Authorization decisions MUST NOT depend on its global uniqueness.
   nonce MUST contain at least 16 random octets generated with a
   cryptographically secure random source consistent with [RFC4086].  It
   MUST be encoded as unpadded base64url as defined by Section 5 of
   [RFC4648], MUST contain 22 through 128 ASCII characters, and is
   compared as an exact, case-sensitive string.  It MUST be single-use
   within the authenticated issuer's replay domain.  The security replay



Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   key is the authenticated issuer identity and nonce; challenge_id is
   not part of that key.  A live replay key MUST NOT be overwritten.
   Reuse of one replay key with a different authenticated body is an
   integrity or issuer collision failure, not a replay of the exact
   body.

   Each binding or profile MUST define the stable authenticated issuer
   identity used in that replay key.  Every alias, front end, and
   replica that can validate the same issuer-protected challenge MUST
   map it to the same issuer identity and authoritative replay domain.
   A presenter-controlled host name, forwarding field, routing hint, or
   unauthenticated alias MUST NOT select or split that identity.

   Before exposing a challenge, the relying party MUST either register a
   durable record that binds the nonce to the complete challenge body,
   or protect the complete body with an issuer-authenticated, self-
   describing mechanism defined by the applicable profile.  The latter
   mechanism MUST let the relying party reconstruct and validate the
   exact body without trusting presenter-supplied fields.  A bare
   challenge body carried only under a transport session is not a self-
   describing mechanism after that session ends.

   Each binding or profile MUST define one collision-resistant digest
   procedure with an output of at least 256 bits for the complete
   authenticated challenge body.  The procedure MUST be domain-separated
   for AE-CHALLENGE bodies and MUST cover every core and extension
   member, including unknown members, after duplicate-member rejection.
   It MAY hash exact encoded bytes only when the binding guarantees
   those bytes are preserved; otherwise it MUST define a deterministic
   representation that preserves every data-model distinction accepted
   by the binding's parser.  Stateful registration MUST pin the digest
   algorithm and canonicalization profile with the registered body;
   self-describing issuance MUST authenticate the same pins.  Returned
   presentations MUST use those pinned procedures.  A transport
   reserialization, member-order change, non-JSON mapping, or mutable
   local configuration MUST NOT silently switch digest or
   canonicalization procedures.

   The reference HTTP helpers consume already decoded objects.  They
   begin only after the carrier has applied a bounded raw-message parser
   and duplicate-member detection.  Those helpers are not evidence that
   an ordinary JSON parser supplied by a generic HTTP framework
   satisfies these requirements.








Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   Self-describing issuance can avoid retaining one record for every
   unanswered challenge.  It does not remove single-use state.  On the
   first returned presentation, the relying party still MUST claim the
   nonce through the compound authoritative transition in Section 2.6
   before evidence evaluation.

   action_digest MUST be computed by the relying party from the exact
   action it would admit.  It MUST NOT be copied from the presenter or
   from presented evidence. action_profile MUST be present, MUST be an
   absolute URI as defined by [RFC3986], and identifies the
   canonicalization or mapping profile used to derive the digest.  It is
   descriptive to the presenter; it does not let the presenter select or
   weaken that profile.  If two parties cannot establish the same
   material action under an understood profile, the challenge cannot
   repair the disagreement and the relying party MUST refuse automated
   admission.

   The security action binding is the ordered pair (action_profile,
   action_digest), not the digest alone.  Every evidence correlation,
   continuation, comparison, and downstream admission profile that
   relies on this challenge MUST authenticate and compare both members.
   An implementation MUST NOT accept evidence merely because a digest
   produced under a different action profile has the same octets.

   The relying party MUST pin the semantics of the selected
   action_profile for the lifetime of the challenge.  It MUST NOT fetch
   mutable profile content at evaluation time and silently apply
   different canonicalization or material-field rules under the same
   profile identifier.  A deployment using resolvable profile documents
   needs an immutable version, authenticated content digest, or
   equivalent local pin.  An action profile that claims exact-action
   binding MUST include every input whose change can alter
   authorization, target or resource selection, the provider request, or
   an externally observable effect.  If a profile omits such a material
   field, it MUST NOT describe its digest as an exact-action binding,
   and a relying party that requires exact-action binding MUST refuse to
   use it.

   audience identifies the component that is expected to answer the
   challenge.  A binding or authenticated envelope MUST let the
   presenter establish the challenge issuer and its own effective
   audience.  Before following an obtain hint or disclosing evidence,
   the presenter MUST authenticate the issuer and verify that the
   effective audience identifies that presenter.  On return, the relying
   party MUST authenticate the presenter and bind that identity to the
   effective audience before claiming the nonce.  A profile that
   intentionally permits a transferable or anonymous presentation MUST
   state that exception and define its confidentiality, replay, and



Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   denial-of-service consequences.  The audience identifier namespace,
   comparison procedure, alias mapping or mapping version, and resulting
   stable principal MUST be pinned for the lifetime of the challenge.
   Stateful registration MUST store those pins with the body; self-
   describing issuance MUST authenticate them.  A mutable directory,
   configuration change, or alias update MUST NOT reinterpret the same
   audience string between issuance and return.  If the pinned mapping
   is unavailable or has changed, the relying party MUST refuse the old
   presentation and MAY issue a fresh challenge under the new mapping
   when policy permits.

   policy_id and policy_digest identify the local policy state from
   which the requirements were derived.  They do not transfer policy
   authority to the presenter.  At evaluation time the relying party
   MUST use its authenticated live policy and MUST NOT use a policy
   supplied in the response.

   Delegation, translation, or task rewriting does not preserve one
   action binding across hops.  Each receiving relying party MUST re-
   evaluate the action it is asked to admit under its own policy and
   action profile.  If that relying party issues a challenge, it MUST
   derive a new action_digest and register its own challenge binding.  A
   prior hop's challenge or decision record MAY be presented as evidence
   or context, but it MUST NOT substitute for the receiving relying
   party's binding to a rewritten action.  A chain of per-hop records
   does not by itself prove that the actions at different hops are
   semantically equivalent.

2.3.  Evidence Requirements and Presentation

   Each required_evidence entry MUST contain a requirement_id and type.
   Requirement identifiers are unique within one challenge and correlate
   requirements with acquisition hints and diagnostics.  Every evidence
   type, evidence profiles entry, and present_as entry MUST be an
   absolute URI as defined by [RFC3986] so that the same identifier has
   portable meaning across transport protocols and conformance corpora.
   Unless the defining specification says otherwise, these identifiers
   are compared as exact strings.  A recipient MUST NOT infer security
   semantics from URI prefixes or substring matches; it uses only
   locally configured semantics for the complete identifier.

   The relying party MUST pin, for the lifetime of the challenge, the
   security semantics of every evidence type, evidence profiles entry,
   proof_predicates value, status definition, and present_as profile
   used by that challenge.  A deployment MUST use immutable versioned
   identifiers, authenticated content digests, or equivalent local
   version pins.  It MUST NOT resolve the same identifier to weaker or
   otherwise different verification semantics at evaluation time.  If



Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   any pinned semantic version changes, the relying party MUST refuse
   the old presentation and issue a fresh challenge under the new pins
   when policy permits.

   An entry MAY contain profiles, proof_predicates, max_age_sec, and
   status.  Every entry in required_evidence is a conjunctive
   requirement: the relying party MUST NOT treat the challenge as
   satisfied unless every entry is satisfied.  Within one entry,
   profiles are alternatives, so one locally accepted listed profile is
   sufficient for that dimension.  Every listed proof_predicates value
   is conjunctive and MUST be satisfied.  The max_age_sec and status
   constraints, when present, are also conjunctive with the evidence
   type, selected profile, and proof predicates.  An application profile
   that needs disjunction across evidence types MUST define a new
   evidence type or other explicit expression; it MUST NOT reinterpret
   the core array as disjunctive. max_age_sec is measured at the relying
   party's evaluation time using the issuance or observation time
   defined by the selected evidence profile. status equal to current
   requires a separately authenticated status result satisfying the
   relying party's freshness policy; it does not mean that absence from
   an unauthenticated revocation list is sufficient.

   The evaluation-time source used for max_age_sec, status freshness,
   and policy replay MUST be selected by the relying party or its
   authoritative owner.  A presenter, verifier worker, request field, or
   caller-supplied replay timestamp MUST NOT move that time backward or
   otherwise make stale evidence appear fresh.  A binding or profile
   MUST define the trustworthy time source and the instant at which the
   evaluation snapshot is taken.  An implementation using the owner-side
   transition in Section 2.6 can use the authoritative transaction time
   returned by the successful claim as that snapshot.

   present_as lists alternative presentation profiles.  The order
   expresses the relying party's preference, not a security ranking.
   Supporting a presentation profile does not imply support for every
   evidence type named by the challenge.  The presenter selects one
   mutually supported profile and includes enough information for the
   relying party to match every component to a requirement.  Each
   presentation-profile specification MUST define the response carrier
   or encoding, how the challenge or an immutable authenticated
   reference to it is returned, how the selected profile is identified,
   how presented components map to requirement_id values, how exact-
   action correlation authenticates both action_profile and
   action_digest, and either how the returning presenter is
   authenticated or how an explicitly anonymous or transferable profile
   satisfies the confidentiality, replay, and denial-of-service rules in
   this document.  This core does not define a generic successful-
   response envelope.



Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   A fresh challenge is evaluated from a complete authenticated evidence
   presentation under live policy.  The core defines no implicit carry-
   over of evidence, verification results, or ambient verifier state
   from a consumed challenge.  A separate continuation profile MAY omit
   already satisfied evidence only when the new authenticated challenge
   binds an immutable predecessor evaluation, the exact evidence and
   verification semantics relied upon, issuer, presenter or explicit
   transfer rule, the complete action-binding pair, policy, freshness
   and status observations, and applicable capacity state.  The
   continuation state MUST participate in replay protection and state
   bounds.  Without such a profile, every follow-up repeats the complete
   requirement set and the presenter re-presents all required evidence.

   obtain_hints are untrusted routing hints.  Following a hint,
   authenticating to its URI, or receiving an "approved" response
   confers no authority at the relying party.  Evidence obtained through
   a hint remains subject to native verification, exact-action matching,
   freshness and status checks, policy evaluation, and one-time
   consumption.  A presenter MUST NOT send credentials or evidence to a
   hinted endpoint unless its own policy independently authorizes the
   endpoint, scheme, redirect behavior, and disclosed material.  Each
   hint requirement_id MUST identify an entry in the same challenge.  An
   issuer MAY omit obtain hints when constructing a challenge.  A
   carrier MUST NOT remove them from an already authenticated challenge
   body.  Multiple hints for one requirement are unordered alternatives
   unless an application profile defines ordering.

   Capability discovery MAY advertise evidence types, presentation
   profiles, or acquisition mechanisms that an implementation supports.
   Such discovery is not an authorization decision and does not
   establish that any advertised choice is sufficient for a particular
   action.  The relying party MUST determine sufficiency using its
   authenticated local policy at evaluation time.  A cached discovery
   response, a mutually supported profile, or a successful acquisition
   flow MUST NOT waive an unsatisfied local requirement.

2.4.  Validation and Resource Limits

   A JSON recipient MUST reject duplicate member names at every object
   depth before authenticating, hashing, registering, or evaluating a
   challenge.  A self-describing profile MUST define one deterministic
   serialization or canonicalization for the complete authenticated
   body.  Parser behavior that silently keeps the first or last
   duplicate member does not satisfy complete-body binding.

   required_evidence and present_as MUST be non-empty arrays.
   Requirement identifiers MUST be non-empty and unique.  profiles,
   proof_predicates, present_as, and critical arrays MUST contain unique



Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   values.  The nested core objects in required_evidence, obtain_hints,
   and retry_timing are closed: a recipient MUST reject an unknown
   member in those objects unless the specification for the enclosing
   profile explicitly defines that member.  max_age_sec and jitter_sec,
   when present, MUST be integers from 0 through 2147483647 inclusive.
   A recipient MUST refuse a requirement whose status or
   proof_predicates semantics it does not understand; it MUST NOT treat
   an unknown value as satisfied.

   Every binding and implementation MUST enforce finite limits on the
   encoded message size, nesting depth, number of requirements and
   hints, array lengths, and string lengths before expensive
   cryptographic, native evidence, network-status, or policy work.  A
   profile intended for interoperable deployment SHOULD publish those
   limits.  State caps do not bound parser, canonicalization, signature-
   verification, or transport costs incurred before the owner-side state
   transition.

2.5.  Lifecycle, Replay, and Retry

   expires_at MUST be an Internet timestamp as defined by [RFC3339].
   The relying party MUST refuse an expired challenge before evidence or
   policy evaluation.  Challenge expiry does not extend the validity of
   any evidence and evidence expiry does not extend the challenge.

   Evaluation is ordered: bounded parsing and structure; authenticated
   issuer and presenter-to-audience binding; validation of the
   registered or self-describing body; current exact-action agreement;
   authoritative routing; one atomic expiry-check, nonce-claim, and
   capacity-reservation transition; native evidence verification; and
   local policy evaluation.  Before that transition, the relying party
   refuses without claiming a nonce or reserving refusal-path capacity
   when bounded syntax or structure fails, the issuer or returning
   presenter cannot be authenticated and bound as required, the
   challenge cannot be associated with a registered replay key or valid
   issuer-protected self-describing body, the presentation does not
   identify an advertised and understood presentation profile, or the
   current proposed action does not agree with the registered exact
   action.  The relying party MUST rederive the action digest from the
   current proposed action it is being asked to admit.  A stored
   challenge digest or a digest copied from the presentation is not that
   rederivation.  Once pre-transition validation succeeds, Section 2.6
   defines the indivisible owner-side transition that precedes evidence
   evaluation.  For stateful issuance, authoritative equality between
   the returned body digest and the registered body digest is decided
   inside that transition.  A non-authoritative cache comparison MUST
   NOT replace or preempt the transition's body-collision result.  This
   comparison does not freeze the action for a later executor admission.



Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   An admission protocol using the result MUST independently rederive or
   fence the final action at its effect boundary; AE-CHALLENGE
   authorizes no effect.

   A concurrent duplicate that arrives after another presentation has
   claimed the nonce, whether that first evaluation is still in flight
   or has completed, MUST be refused as a replay.  It MUST NOT receive a
   second evidence evaluation, an indeterminate result merely because
   the first evaluation is in flight, or a second admission.  An
   implementation MAY distinguish in-flight from completed consumption
   internally for operations and audit, but that distinction does not
   reopen the challenge.  The claim binds the nonce to the registered
   challenge body, not to a digest of the presented evidence payload.  A
   structurally valid, exact-action presentation therefore spends the
   one presentation attempt even when later evidence evaluation refuses
   it or the response is lost.  The presenter starts a new interaction
   to obtain a fresh challenge; it does not replay the consumed nonce.

   Every verifier instance that accepts presentations for one challenge
   issuer MUST use the same authoritative replay domain, or a
   deterministic partition in which exactly one authoritative shard owns
   each issuer-and-nonce replay key.  A process-local cache or
   eventually consistent replica does not satisfy atomic nonce claim.
   If the authoritative replay domain is unavailable or its result is
   uncertain, the relying party MUST refuse without evidence evaluation
   or admission; it MUST NOT fall back to fresh local state.

   A profile using deterministic partitioning MUST define how the
   authoritative owner is derived from issuer-protected challenge state.
   A presenter-controlled routing value outside the authenticated
   challenge body or authenticated issuer context MUST NOT select the
   owner.  A front end or non-owning shard MUST route the claim to the
   owner before classifying the nonce.  Only an authoritative owner
   result that the exact registered body was already claimed is a replay
   result.  Failure, timeout, partition, or an uncertain result while
   reaching the owner is temporary unavailability, not replay, and MUST
   NOT be reported as an already-claimed nonce.














Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   If evidence remains missing, stale, or unverifiable, the relying
   party MAY issue a follow-up challenge.  Before doing so, it MUST
   rederive the current proposed action under its pinned action profile.
   If that digest no longer equals the consumed challenge digest, it
   MUST NOT issue a follow-up for the old action.  A valid follow-up
   MUST use a fresh challenge identifier and nonce, MUST remain bound to
   the same locally rederived action digest and action profile, and MUST
   derive its requirements and policy identifiers from authenticated
   live policy.  It MUST list the complete requirement set unless a
   continuation profile satisfying Section 2.3 is explicitly in use.  It
   is a new refusal with new authoritative state, never an implicit
   continuation of the consumed nonce or ambient prior evidence.

   An implementation that automatically issues follow-up challenges or
   restarts a challenge after a claimed presentation MUST enforce a
   finite reissue budget bound at least to the authenticated issuer,
   effective presenter or audience, action profile and digest, and
   policy.  A fresh challenge identifier or nonce does not reset that
   budget.  When the budget is exhausted, the relying party MUST stop
   automatic reissue and use a generic refusal or a separately
   authorized out-of-band recovery path.  It MUST NOT reopen or reuse a
   consumed nonce.

   retry_timing is OPTIONAL.  When present, it MUST contain a not_before
   Internet timestamp as defined by [RFC3339] and MAY contain a non-
   negative integer jitter_sec. not_before MUST precede expires_at, and
   adding jitter_sec to not_before MUST still produce an instant before
   expires_at.  A presenter that processes this member MUST NOT send the
   challenge response before not_before.  When jitter_sec is greater
   than zero, the presenter SHOULD add an independently selected delay
   between zero and that many seconds.  The selected delay SHOULD vary
   for each challenge and MUST NOT be treated as extending expires_at.
   The not_before value is only the earliest time to present corrected
   evidence.  It is not a promise of capacity, evidence sufficiency,
   admission, or execution.  After waiting, the presenter can receive
   the same refusal, a different refusal, or an overload response.















Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   A relying party that expects many correlated refusals SHOULD issue
   recipient-specific or challenge-specific retry schedules rather than
   one common retry instant.  It SHOULD provide a jitter interval wide
   enough for its expected population and recovery capacity.  A
   presenter remains responsible for its own backoff and rate limits
   when timing is absent.  A challenge MUST NOT be issued solely to
   signal overload when the carrying protocol has a distinct overload
   response.  If evidence insufficiency and load pressure coexist, retry
   timing can pace the new evidence presentation without changing the
   refusal semantics.  The presenter can therefore spend effort
   acquiring third-party evidence and still be refused or shed after the
   lower bound; timing guidance does not assert which constraint will be
   decisive later.

   Ignoring retry_timing does not make evidence sufficient or authorize
   an action, but it can defeat the issuer's load-control goal.  It does
   not change the semantic meaning of the challenge and therefore MUST
   NOT appear in critical.  An issuer that relies on enforced pacing
   MUST enforce it through carrier-level overload handling, admission
   control, rate limiting, or refusal; it MUST NOT rely on retry_timing
   as an enforcement control.  A presenter that cannot establish whether
   not_before has passed MUST NOT infer permission to send early; it
   uses its local backoff policy or declines automated retry.

   Expiry is tested as part of the owner-side claim transition.  A
   presentation claimed before expiry MAY finish evaluation after that
   instant, but challenge expiry never extends evidence validity or
   permits admission under stale policy.  Implementations MUST place a
   finite deadline on native verification and finalization.  Reclaiming
   an abandoned reservation requires an ownership fence that prevents
   the old worker from later committing a follow-up or other refusal-
   path state.

   Unknown acquisition status, timeout, transport failure, or an
   unverifiable response is indeterminate.  It MUST NOT be interpreted
   as evidence satisfaction or permission to retry an action whose
   effect may already have occurred.

2.6.  State Bounds and Exhaustion

   A relying party MUST configure a finite aggregate upper bound on
   challenge state retained in one authoritative replay domain.  The
   bound MUST account for outstanding stateful challenges and in-flight
   or consumed replay records.  Where a presenter is authenticated
   before challenge issuance, the relying party SHOULD also apply per-
   presenter and per-audience bounds.  Multi-tenant deployments SHOULD
   apply an administrative bound per tenant so one tenant cannot consume
   the aggregate allowance.



Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   Admission control for a stateful challenge MUST occur before the
   challenge is exposed.  The cap check, insertion of the issuer-and-
   nonce replay key and complete authenticated body binding, and debit
   across every applicable outstanding-state bucket MUST commit as one
   atomic issuance transition in the same coordination domain.  A read-
   check- register sequence or registration followed by a separate
   capacity debit does not satisfy this requirement.  If the relying
   party cannot complete that transition or allocate the required
   outstanding record, it MUST NOT issue or expose the challenge.  It
   returns a carrier-appropriate overload or generic refusal without an
   authorization-evidence challenge.

   For self-describing issuance, the relying party MUST enforce the
   replay-state bound when the first returned presentation attempts to
   claim the nonce.  If it cannot durably and atomically claim replay
   state, it MUST refuse without native evidence verification, policy
   evaluation, or admission.  It MUST NOT issue a replacement stateful
   challenge on that path.  Self-describing issuance reduces unanswered
   outstanding state; it does not make replay processing stateless.

   A relying party that knows its authoritative replay-state bound is
   currently exhausted MUST NOT issue a self-describing challenge whose
   return cannot be claimed.  It uses the carrier's overload or generic
   refusal path until capacity is available.

   An implementation MUST NOT evict a live in-flight or consumed nonce
   record to admit a newer challenge.  Such a record MUST remain in the
   authoritative replay domain until the later of expires_at and
   completion of the in-flight evaluation.  Expired unconsumed records
   MAY be removed.  A deployment that wants to return the protocol's
   expired result during a late-arrival horizon MUST retain an
   authenticated minimal tombstone binding the replay key, body digest,
   and expiry for that horizon.  If a stateful record is removed without
   such a tombstone, a later presentation receives a generic unknown-
   challenge refusal; it MUST NOT be authenticated or classified as
   expired from presenter-supplied fields.  Longer retention for audit
   or abuse detection is a deployment choice.

   Challenge lifetimes SHOULD be no longer than the expected evidence-
   acquisition workflow requires.  Rate limiting, authentication where
   available, self-describing issuance, and short lifetimes can reduce
   state pressure, but none permits fail-open nonce handling.

   Before allocating challenge state or routing work to an authoritative
   owner, an implementation MUST apply a separate finite anti-abuse
   budget appropriate to the authenticated requester, source, tenant, or
   deployment.  That budget covers parsing, authentication, owner
   routing, initial native evidence or policy evaluation used to decide



Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   whether a challenge is needed, and issuance work that the replay-
   state cap cannot protect.  If the implementation already knows that
   its replay-state bound is exhausted, it MUST take the generic refusal
   or overload path before starting such native evidence or policy work.
   Exhausting the separate budget produces a generic refusal, rate-limit
   response, or temporary-overload response without a challenge body.

   For a returned presentation, the authoritative owner MUST perform
   nonce claim and refusal-path capacity reservation as one indivisible
   transition.  Its security inputs are the authenticated issuer
   identity, nonce, exact authenticated body digest, current time, every
   applicable aggregate, per-presenter, per-audience, and per-tenant cap
   bucket, and the maximum refusal-path state the evaluation can create.
   The authoritative owner's current time and the challenge expiry are
   also inputs, so an expiry check cannot race a later claim.  A read-
   only front end, presenter, or verifier-worker timestamp MUST NOT
   determine this expiry result; current time MUST come from the same
   authoritative transaction that claims the nonce and changes capacity.
   A read-only capacity check, a reservation followed by a separate
   nonce claim, or a nonce claim followed by a separate capacity debit
   does not satisfy this requirement.

   The transition has the following mutually exclusive results and total
   ordering.  First, a retained claimed record produces exact-body-
   replay or body-collision.  Second, when no claimed record exists,
   expiry produces expired for a retained open record, retained
   authenticated expiry tombstone, or valid self- describing body.
   Third, an unexpired open record with a different body produces body-
   collision.  Fourth, capacity is checked.  A successful unexpired
   exact claim then produces claimed-with-capacity.  Failure or
   uncertainty while completing this ordering produces unavailable.
   This ordering preserves replay classification for a duplicate
   arriving after expiry while the first claimed evaluation is still in
   flight.

   *  claimed-with-capacity: a statefully registered exact body was
      open, or a valid self-describing exact body had no replay record,
      and sufficient capacity existed.  The nonce claim and the
      reservation or debit across every applicable cap bucket commit
      together.

   *  exact-body-replay: the authenticated issuer-and-nonce key was
      already in claimed state for the same body digest.  No new
      capacity is reserved or debited.







Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   *  body-collision: the same retained claimed replay key, or an
      unexpired open replay key, exists for a different body digest.
      The request is refused as an integrity or issuer collision
      failure, never as successful replay classification, and no new
      capacity is reserved or debited.

   *  capacity-refused: one or more applicable cap buckets lack
      capacity.  No nonce is claimed and no partial debit remains.

   *  expired: authoritative owner time is at or after expires_at.  No
      nonce is claimed and no capacity is reserved or debited.

   *  unavailable: the owner cannot complete the transition or the
      outcome is uncertain.  The caller reports temporary unavailability
      and MUST NOT infer whether authoritative state changed.

   For a statefully issued challenge, an existing outstanding-state
   debit MUST be transferred into the in-flight reservation in the same
   transaction.  Only the positive incremental delta between that debit
   and the conservative in-flight reservation is added to each
   applicable cap bucket.  The existing debit MUST NOT be lost, counted
   twice, or released before replacement state is secured.  The issuance
   transition MUST pin the authenticated identities, bucket keys, and
   bucket limits that produced that debit.  Claim and finalization MUST
   lock and preserve those stored buckets; they MUST NOT recompute and
   replace them from a mutable audience alias, directory result, or
   caller context.  Newly applicable buckets, such as an authenticated
   presenter bucket first available on return, are added to the pinned
   issuance vector in the same transition.  For self-describing
   issuance, the transition creates the first replay record and
   reservation together.  The reservation covers the maximum additional
   state, including a follow-up challenge where supported.  Finalization
   atomically commits the actual resulting state and releases only
   unused capacity.  A worker crash or uncertain finalization retains
   the conservative reservation unless a fenced recovery transition
   proves that the old worker can no longer publish state.

   Every cap bucket changed by the transition MUST be in the same atomic
   coordination domain as the replay claim.  A sharded deployment MAY
   use preallocated owner quotas only when the sum of live quotas cannot
   exceed the global cap and quota transfer itself is safe under
   failure.  Two shards independently reading a global counter do not
   satisfy this rule.  If an applicable cap cannot participate
   atomically or through a safe preallocated quota, the result is
   unavailability.  Capacity uncertainty fails closed.






Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   When a hard cap is binding for an unclaimed exact body, capacity
   handling controls the response even if the supplied evidence is also
   missing, stale, or unverifiable.  The relying party MUST NOT perform
   native evidence verification or local policy evaluation, and MUST NOT
   return a follow-up challenge, a stateless list of remaining
   requirements, obtain hints, or any other evidence-sufficiency detail.
   Withholding and coalescing those details reduces the value of
   exhaustion handling as a policy-discovery oracle; it does not
   eliminate timing or traffic-analysis signals.  Detailed diagnostics
   are limited to authenticated and locally authorized operational
   channels.  An authoritative exact-body-replay result can be returned
   without a capacity debit; it does not invoke evidence or policy
   evaluation.

2.6.1.  State Exhaustion Conformance Cases

   A conforming implementation demonstrates all of the following:

   *  At the outstanding-state cap, a stateful issuer returns no new
      challenge and allocates no additional outstanding record.

   *  With one outstanding-state slot remaining, two concurrent stateful
      issuers produce exactly one committed and exposed challenge and
      one capacity refusal.  Replay registration, complete- body
      binding, and every capacity debit commit together; no bucket
      exceeds its bound.

   *  At the replay-state cap, a returned self-describing challenge
      receives no evidence evaluation, no admission, and no requirements
      or obtain hints.

   *  When evidence is insufficient and a hard cap is also binding, the
      capacity response wins: native verifiers and local policy are not
      invoked and no follow-up or stateless requirements hint is
      returned.

   *  Two verifier replicas concurrently receiving the same nonce and
      exact body produce one claimed-with-capacity result, one exact-
      body-replay result, and exactly one capacity debit.

   *  At a binding cap, an unclaimed body receives capacity-refused, the
      nonce remains unclaimed, and no partial aggregate, presenter,
      audience, or tenant debit remains.








Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 19]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   *  An otherwise retained open record, authenticated expiry tombstone,
      or valid self-describing body that reaches the owner at or after
      expiry receives expired, leaves the nonce unclaimed, and changes
      no capacity bucket.  A removed stateful record without a tombstone
      receives a generic unknown-challenge refusal.  A retained claimed
      record follows the replay-or-collision precedence above.

   *  Reuse of an issuer-and-nonce key with a different body produces
      body-collision, not replay, when the claimed record is retained or
      the open record is unexpired, and changes no capacity bucket.  An
      expired open record produces expired.

   *  Claiming a statefully issued challenge transfers the existing
      outstanding debit and adds only the positive incremental delta; it
      neither double-counts the old debit nor refuses a zero-increment
      transfer merely because the bucket is at its cap.

   *  When issuance and return use different capacity dimensions, such
      as an audience alias at issuance and a stable authenticated
      presenter at return, claim and finalization preserve the pinned
      issuance debit and add the presenter debit atomically.  They do
      not drop the old scope, update an unlocked bucket, or recompute a
      stored limit.

   *  Two owner shards cannot each reserve against one shared global
      slot.  The case passes only with one coordinating transaction or
      preallocated quotas whose live sum is bounded by the global cap.

   *  After a reservation is reassigned during recovery, a late worker
      using the old fencing token cannot publish a follow-up or finalize
      state.

   *  A front end that reaches the authoritative owner and receives an
      already-claimed result reports replay.  The same front end, given
      an owner timeout, partition, or uncertain response, reports
      unavailability and does not report replay or evaluate evidence.

   *  A caller-supplied old timestamp cannot make stale evidence fresh.
      The replay record and freshness verdict use the trustworthy
      evaluation-time source defined by the binding or profile.

   *  A challenge containing a relative evidence type, presentation
      profile, or proof-predicate identifier, a duplicate requirement
      identifier, an unknown nested core member, or an unsatisfiable
      retry window is rejected before replay or capacity state is
      allocated.





Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 20]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   *  Allocating a new challenge never evicts an in-flight or unexpired
      consumed nonce.

2.6.2.  Reference Evidence Boundary

   The same-team TypeScript reference includes an owner state machine
   and a PostgreSQL transaction backend for the stateful path above.
   The owner store registers issuance with capacity before exposure,
   stores the issuance debit, bucket limits, and authenticated presenter
   instead of recomputing them from the audience, uses PostgreSQL
   transaction time for expiry, evidence-freshness evaluation, and
   recovery, locks replay and capacity rows, returns an opaque
   generation-bound reservation, and atomically finalizes a terminal
   result or a fresh follow-up.  Recovery is deadline-gated, requires a
   constructor-pinned local authorizer, and replaces the reservation
   generation so an old token cannot finalize.  The production evaluator
   accepts only the owner-store object created by that factory; copied
   objects and caller-declared capability flags are refused.  Capacity-
   row validation does not assume that JavaScript and PostgreSQL use the
   same collation.  Caller-selected production follow-up nonces are
   rejected before claim, and a local follow-up construction failure
   triggers terminal finalization without exposing replacement state.
   If that finalization is uncertain, the evaluator returns
   unavailability rather than claiming terminal state.

   The reference owner rejects a challenge larger than 65536 UTF-8
   octets, more than 64 evidence requirements or obtain hints, more than
   16 presentation or per-requirement profile identifiers, or more than
   32 proof-predicate or critical identifiers.  It also rejects relative
   security identifiers, duplicate requirement identifiers, unknown
   nested core members, non-canonical durable nonces, and invalid retry
   windows before allocating state.  Local evidence-type tokens are
   mapped to exact absolute URIs under https://emiliaprotocol.ai/ns/ for
   its experimental profile; consumers use the complete URI and do not
   infer semantics from that prefix.  If authenticated live policy
   changes, the reference starts a fresh interaction rather than
   treating old verification work as a continuation.














Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 21]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   Executable tests cover duplicate claim, capacity refusal without
   nonce burn, authoritative expiry and freshness time, terminal release
   of unused capacity, atomic follow-up creation, stale-worker fencing,
   and the PostgreSQL transaction adapter.  They also exercise profile-
   native verification through the Model-to-Matter path using owner-
   supplied time.  A separate finite same-team harness checks 114 small
   scenarios and exposes unsafe mutations.  Neither artifact is an
   independent implementation, a deployment audit, a proof of PostgreSQL
   isolation, or a mechanized refinement proof.  Deployments remain
   responsible for installing the schema, pinning the capacity policy,
   isolating the owner role, and verifying the database configuration.

2.7.  Extensibility

   The critical array names top-level members of the core challenge
   only; it does not name nested members or JSON Pointer paths.
   Recipients MUST ignore an unknown top-level challenge member unless
   its name appears in critical.  A recipient that does not understand
   every member named by critical MUST refuse automated processing.
   Every name in critical MUST identify a member actually present in the
   same challenge, and core members MUST NOT be named there.  A
   specification defining an extension MUST state whether that extension
   is safe to ignore and how it is bound to the registered challenge
   body.  The core retry_timing member is safe to ignore for challenge
   semantics and MUST NOT be named by critical.  Unknown outer Problem
   Details members are not core challenge members and follow the
   processing rules of [RFC9457].

2.8.  Carrier Semantics

   A transport binding SHOULD carry a challenge as a structured refusal
   or error payload when the carrying protocol provides such a facility.
   A binding that uses a message part, task-state extension, or other
   carrier MUST preserve the same refusal semantics and scope the
   challenge to the identified attempt.  It MUST NOT represent the
   challenge as a successful task result, output artifact,
   authorization, or durable state that silently applies to later
   attempts.  These rules constrain carrier semantics without requiring
   every transport to use the same envelope.

3.  HTTP Challenge Response Carrier

   This section defines only the HTTP refusal response that carries a
   challenge.  It does not define the corrected request, evidence
   upload, or successful presentation response.  An application profile
   selected from present_as MUST define that return path, authenticated
   issuer, effective audience, complete-body digest, and exact-action
   procedures, plus either authenticated presenter binding or an



Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 22]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   explicitly declared anonymous or transferable exception satisfying
   the core rules.

   This carrier is not a native OAuth transaction-authorization
   response.  When a protected resource requires a transaction-specific
   native OAuth grant, it follows the applicable OAuth flow and MUST NOT
   return only this document's response and then accept AE evidence as a
   substitute for the missing native grant.  OAuth Transaction
   Authorization Challenge [OAUTH-TXN-CHALLENGE] is one example of that
   separate native flow.

   This carrier applies only after HTTP authentication has succeeded or
   is inapplicable and the origin server understood the request but
   refuses it for application-authorization reasons.  It MUST NOT
   replace a 401 Unauthorized response and required WWW-Authenticate
   challenge under [RFC9110].

   When an HTTP origin server uses this carrier, it MUST return 403
   Forbidden as defined by [RFC9110].  The response body MUST be an
   application/problem+json Problem Details object as defined by
   [RFC9457].  This carrier MUST NOT be used in a response to HEAD,
   because HTTP forbids response content for that method.  A bodyless
   refusal to HEAD conveys no AE-CHALLENGE unless a separate retrieval
   profile is defined.

   If temporary overload or temporary owner unavailability is the reason
   for refusal, an origin server uses 503 Service Unavailable and MAY
   use Retry-After only when the service itself is temporarily
   unavailable or overloaded.  A gateway or proxy uses 504 Gateway
   Timeout for an upstream owner timeout and can use 502 Bad Gateway
   when the upstream response satisfies that status code's semantics
   under [RFC9110].  Actual request-rate limiting can use 429 Too Many
   Requests as defined by [RFC6585].  A permanent administrative limit
   or generic policy refusal can use 403 without the ae-required problem
   type.  None of these responses includes evidence_challenge, remaining
   requirements, obtain hints, or evidence-sufficiency details merely
   because evidence might also be insufficient.

   The following example omits HTTP message-framing fields such as
   Content-Length.  A sender still supplies framing required by the HTTP
   version and connection in use.

   The ae-required problem type MUST be used only when the server is
   returning a fresh evidence challenge after a successful claimed-with-
   capacity transition or when issuing a newly registered stateful
   challenge or a valid newly issuer-protected self-describing
   challenge.  An exact-body-replay, body-collision, or expired result
   MUST NOT be represented as a fresh AE-CHALLENGE and MUST NOT include



Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 23]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   a replacement challenge on that response.  An implementation uses 409
   Conflict only when an application profile establishes a conflict with
   the target resource's current state that the requester can resolve;
   replay, expiry, and body collision do not by themselves establish
   that condition.

   HTTP/1.1 403 Forbidden
   Content-Type: application/problem+json
   Cache-Control: no-store
   Date: Sun, 09 Aug 2026 23:50:00 GMT
   Retry-After: 30

   {
   "type":"https://iana.org/assignments/http-problem-types#ae-required",
     "title": "Authorization Evidence Required",
     "status": 403,
     "detail": "Required evidence is unavailable.",
     "evidence_challenge": {
       "@version": "AE-CHALLENGE-v1",
       "challenge_id": "7a3120d1-65b4-4d1a-85d4-9128adf76b41",
       "nonce": "ABEiM0RVZneImaq7zN3u_w",
       "action_digest": "sha256:aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa",
       "action_profile": "https://example.net/action/payment-v3",
       "audience": "https://agent.example",
       "policy_id": "https://resource.example/policies/high-risk-v4",
       "policy_digest": "sha256:bbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbb",
       "required_evidence": [
         { "requirement_id": "human-approval",
           "type": "https://example.net/e/authorization-receipt",
           "max_age_sec": 300,
           "status": "current" }
       ],
       "present_as": ["https://example.net/p/ep-aec-v1"],
       "obtain_hints": [],
       "retry_timing": {
         "not_before": "2026-08-09T23:50:30Z",
         "jitter_sec": 20
       },
       "expires_at": "2026-08-10T00:05:00Z"
     }
   }










Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 24]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   The Problem Details type MUST have the value shown above.  The title
   SHOULD use the shown English title but MAY be localized; clients MUST
   NOT interpret it for protocol semantics.  The HTTP status code MUST
   be 403.  The status member MAY be omitted; when present, it MUST be
   403.  The core challenge MUST appear in the evidence_challenge
   extension member.  Human-readable detail text is advisory and MUST
   NOT be parsed for protocol semantics.

   The origin server MUST send Cache-Control: no-store as defined by
   [RFC9111].  A generic intermediary can still transform an HTTP
   response, so a client MUST validate the Problem Details object and
   the authenticated origin before acting on hints or presenting
   evidence.

   When the core challenge contains retry_timing, the origin server
   SHOULD send a Retry-After field as defined by [RFC9110].  A client
   converts an HTTP-date directly to an instant.  It converts delay-
   seconds to an instant relative to the time it received the response,
   not to the response's Date field.  It then uses the later of that
   instant and not_before and applies jitter_sec.  If a client cannot
   establish the clock basis needed for an automatic request, it does
   not send automatically.  If the computed instant is not before
   expires_at, the client MUST NOT submit the expired challenge and can
   request a new interaction under its carrier.  Retry-After does not
   carry the jitter value and does not change the challenge expiry,
   authorize the action, promise capacity or acceptance, or make a retry
   safe after an uncertain effect.  If an intermediary changes the HTTP
   status from 403, a client MUST NOT process the response as this
   carrier merely because the body still contains the type URI.

3.1.  OAuth Non-Substitution Conformance Case

   A protected resource requires a transaction-specific OAuth grant.
   The presenter supplies a valid AE-CHALLENGE response but no native
   transaction-bound access token.  The protected resource MUST refuse
   the action.  It MUST NOT treat the AE challenge identifier or nonce
   as the OAuth transaction identifier, and it MUST NOT report the
   evidence presentation as satisfying the native grant requirement.
   The case passes only when the protected resource continues the native
   OAuth flow or refuses.











Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 25]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


4.  Informative DMSC Gateway Illustration

   Agent gateways can carry the transport-neutral challenge during
   federation or handoff.  The receiving gateway is the relying party:
   it derives the exact action, applies its own trust anchors and
   policy, and issues a challenge when evidence is missing, stale, or
   unverifiable.  The sending gateway or agent can obtain evidence and
   return a new presentation using a DMSC-defined extension point or
   error carrier.

   If the receiving gateway's required next step is a native OAuth
   transaction grant, the DMSC carrier preserves that native challenge
   rather than wrapping it as AE-CHALLENGE.  A DMSC application profile
   can carry both only under the explicit composition rules in
   Section 1.1.

   If a gateway rewrites or translates the proposed action, the next
   gateway re-evaluates that locally derived action and, when necessary,
   issues its own binding.  The prior gateway's action digest does not
   survive the rewrite as the receiving gateway's binding.  Any claim
   that the two actions are equivalent requires a separately defined
   mapping or transformation proof.

   When a receiving gateway refuses an action because required
   authorization evidence is missing, stale, or unverifiable, it may
   return a structured evidence challenge identifying the exact action,
   outstanding evidence requirements, applicable freshness or status
   constraints, and supported presentation profiles.  The challenge does
   not authorize the action or transfer admission ownership; conserved
   admission across gateway boundaries remains a separate requirement.
   The gap analysis in [DMSC-GAPS] provides deployment context, but this
   document does not depend on an unpublished section number or future
   revision.

   In particular, AE-CHALLENGE does not prevent Gateway A and Gateway B
   from admitting the same single-use right.  It does not copy, fence,
   or relinquish consumption state and does not establish which gateway
   owns admission during a partition.  The separate handoff property is
   not a race to decide which gateway admitted first; it is an invariant
   that committed capacity is not over-allocated under any interleaving
   of admissions and releases.  A future DMSC handoff profile would need
   to solve that property separately.  If the receiving gateway cannot
   establish the required exclusivity, its safe result is refusal or
   indeterminate, not acceptance based on the challenge.







Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 26]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


4.1.  Illustrative Gateway Case

   Gateway A forwards a proposed action to Gateway B.  Gateway B derives
   the exact action under its pinned action profile and refuses because
   a current approval artifact is missing.  B returns an AE-CHALLENGE
   bound to B's action digest and local evidence requirement.  A obtains
   and presents the artifact.  B verifies it under B's trust anchors,
   matches it to the same action, and reevaluates B's policy.  The case
   passes only if A never treats the challenge as authorization and B
   refuses an action-digest mismatch, stale status, replayed nonce, or
   unsupported presentation profile.  This is an illustration, not a
   DMSC conformance requirement.

   A second case attempts concurrent admission of one single-use right
   at both gateways.  AE-CHALLENGE alone does not pass that case.  The
   case would pass only when a separate conserved-admission mechanism
   establishes exclusivity, or when the receiving gateway refuses or
   returns indeterminate because exclusivity cannot be established.

5.  Security Considerations

   *Challenge forgery and evidence exfiltration.* A forged challenge
   cannot authorize an action, but it can redirect a presenter, induce
   unnecessary approval work, or solicit sensitive evidence.  Presenters
   authenticate the issuer and verify that they are the effective
   audience before following obtain hints or disclosing evidence.
   Relying parties authenticate the returning presenter against that
   same audience before claiming state.  A bare JSON object copied
   outside its authenticated carrier has no origin authenticity.

   *Hint SSRF and credential forwarding.* An authenticated issuer can
   still be compromised or misconfigured, and a hint can target
   loopback, link-local, private, metadata-service, or attacker-
   controlled endpoints.  Presenters apply independent URI, origin,
   redirect, credential, and evidence-disclosure policy.  Challenge
   authentication never makes a hinted endpoint trusted.

   *Action substitution.* The relying party computes the challenge
   action digest from the action it would admit and recomputes the
   digest from the current proposed action before claiming the
   challenge.  A stored challenge digest, a digest supplied by the
   presenter, or an action profile selected by the presenter defeats the
   purpose of the protocol.  This pre-claim comparison is not the
   executor's final action fence.  A later admission or effect boundary
   rederives or immutably binds the action again so a change after
   challenge evaluation cannot substitute a different effect.





Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 27]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   *Action-profile confusion and incomplete actions.* The action binding
   is the authenticated pair of action profile and digest.  Comparing a
   digest without its profile permits evidence produced under different
   action semantics to be spliced into the challenge.  A profile that
   omits a beneficiary, resource, amount, provider parameter, or other
   field material to authorization or effect can also reproduce a digest
   while changing the real action.  Profiles therefore pin their
   semantics, cover every material field, and travel with every digest
   comparison.

   *Replay and state exhaustion.* Stateful issuance binds the complete
   body before exposure; self-describing issuance defers storage but
   still requires an atomic replay claim before evidence evaluation.
   The owner claims the issuer-and-nonce key and reserves all applicable
   refusal-path capacity as one atomic transition.  Separating those
   operations permits duplicate reservations, nonce burn, or global cap
   over-allocation.  An attacker can provoke refusals cheaply or consume
   a structurally valid challenge.  Aggregate and scoped bounds, short
   expiries, authentication where available, and rate limits are
   therefore required operational controls.  Exhaustion or replay-store
   uncertainty fails closed.  Live replay state is never evicted to make
   room for new work.  Hard-cap capacity and the nonce claim commit
   together before native evidence-signature verification and evidence-
   status work, so those tasks do not run after the state budget is
   exhausted.  Envelope and presenter authentication that occur before
   the owner transition remain protected only by the separate pre-owner
   anti-abuse budget.

   *Targeted attempt burning.* The claim-before-evaluation order means a
   structurally valid, exact-action presentation spends the challenge
   even when its evidence is insufficient.  Authenticating the returning
   presenter against the effective audience before claim prevents an
   unrelated caller from spending an audience-bound challenge, but an
   authorized, compromised, or transferable presenter can still consume
   an attempt deliberately.  Automatic reissue without an action-scoped
   bound turns that behavior into a denial-of-approval loop.
   Implementations therefore enforce the finite reissue budget in
   Section 2.5 and stop automatic reissue when it is exhausted.  This
   availability failure does not make the consumed nonce reusable and
   MUST NOT be reported as replay by the party whose first claim
   succeeded.

   *Replica consistency.* Per-process replay caches permit two verifier
   replicas to accept the same nonce.  Verifiers for one issuer need one
   atomic replay domain or an exclusive deterministic shard.  During
   partition or store failure they refuse rather than create local
   replacement state.  Only the owning shard's authoritative already-
   claimed result is replay; routing failure is unavailability and is



Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 28]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   not relabeled as attacker replay.  An uncertain owner response does
   not prove that the transition failed to commit; callers retain the
   unavailable result and do not create local replacement state.

   *Parser and pre-claim work amplification.* State caps apply only at
   the owner-side transition.  They do not protect an unbounded JSON
   parser, duplicate-member ambiguity, canonicalization, envelope
   verification, action derivation, or an initial evidence evaluation
   used to decide whether to issue a challenge.  Finite pre-
   cryptographic limits, duplicate-member refusal, and a separate pre-
   owner computation budget are therefore independent requirements.  A
   known-exhausted replay-state bound is handled before starting
   optional native verification.

   *Retry synchronization and load amplification.* A precise challenge
   tells a presenter how to correct a request, so a population receiving
   similar refusals can retry in a synchronized burst.  An issuer under
   pressure SHOULD combine recipient-specific retry timing, a non-zero
   jitter interval, admission control, and rate limiting.  A presenter
   SHOULD retain exponential backoff or equivalent local load control
   even when a challenge supplies a lower bound.  Timing guidance paces
   only a new evidence presentation and MUST NOT be interpreted as
   evidence satisfaction, authorization, or a promise that capacity or
   admission will exist after not_before.

   *Information disclosure.* Evidence requirements, policy identifiers,
   action profiles, and obtain hints can reveal sensitive policy
   structure.  A relying party SHOULD disclose only the minimum
   information needed for remediation.  The HTTP carrier requires Cache-
   Control: no-store.  When a hard cap is binding, the relying party
   discloses no requirements, obtain hints, or evidence-sufficiency
   details.  Returning a stateless hint in that state would turn
   overload handling into a policy oracle.  Deployments SHOULD
   authenticate or otherwise authorize a requester before disclosing
   policy details when the requirements themselves reveal sensitive
   resources, roles, or controls; otherwise they use a generic refusal
   or a deliberately reduced challenge.  When the challenge itself
   contains sensitive action, policy, identity, or routing information,
   the binding or authenticated envelope MUST also provide
   confidentiality appropriate to the deployment.  Digests do not make
   low-entropy values secret: equality tests and dictionary attacks can
   reveal guessed actions, policies, or requirements.









Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 29]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   *Stale facts and uncertain effects.* A satisfied challenge means only
   that the relying party concluded, under its live local policy at
   evaluation time, that the evidence requirement was met.  It does not
   prove that external facts remain true, that an action executed, or
   that an uncertain action is safe to retry.  Status rechecking,
   execution custody, effect observation, and reconciliation remain
   separate controls.

   *Gateway split brain.* An authenticated challenge from a receiving
   gateway does not transfer a single-use authorization or its
   consumption ledger.  Implementations MUST NOT claim cross-gateway
   double-admission prevention merely because both gateways implement
   this challenge.  A separate conserved-admission protocol MAY transfer
   or fence admission ownership, but AE-CHALLENGE neither defines nor
   implies that protocol.

6.  IANA Considerations

   IANA is requested to add the following entry to the "HTTP Problem
   Types" registry established by [RFC9457].  That registry uses the
   Specification Required policy defined by [RFC8126] and therefore
   requires approval by a designated expert; this request does not
   require IETF Review or Standards Action.

   Type URI:
      https://iana.org/assignments/http-problem-types#ae-required

   Title:  Authorization Evidence Required

   Recommended HTTP status code:  403

   Reference:  This document.

   The HTTP carrier reuses the registered application/problem+json media
   type.  Non-HTTP bindings define their own carriage without changing
   the core data model.

7.  Future Work

   The following transport profiles and compositions are outside AE-
   CHALLENGE-v1.  They are not required to implement the core data model
   or the HTTP challenge-response carrier:

   *  Agent2Agent and AgentProto profiles can define carriers that
      preserve the complete challenge, authenticated issuer, audience,
      retry timing, and attempt correlation.





Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 30]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   *  A DMSC gateway profile can define direct carriage or an
      authenticated, digest-bound reference.

   *  An OAuth composition profile can define when both a native OAuth
      transaction challenge and an AE-CHALLENGE are present and expose
      their independent replay domains.

8.  Acknowledgments

   Thanks to Sumit P.  Ahuja for identifying synchronized retry and load
   amplification as a consequence of precise challenge guidance, for
   correcting retry criticality and non-promissory timing semantics, and
   for identifying refusal-path state exhaustion, cap-before-
   verification ordering, policy-oracle risk under load, and the
   distinction between an authoritative replay result and failure to
   reach the owning shard.  Thanks to Guigui Wang for implementation
   feedback on structured error payloads, per-hop action rebinding, and
   the separation of capability discovery from local authority.  Thanks
   to Henri Sirkkavaara for review of replay ordering, concurrent-
   presentation behavior, diagnostic ordering, and portable identifier
   semantics.

9.  Changes since -06

   *  Replaces separate capacity-reservation and nonce-claim steps with
      one atomic owner-side transition and defines its six closed
      results.

   *  Prevents duplicate capacity debit, nonce burn on capacity refusal,
      cross-shard cap over-allocation, and stale-worker finalization
      through coordinated cap buckets, conservative reservations, and
      fencing.

   *  Adds a same-team transactional owner implementation and PostgreSQL
      backend with authoritative database time for expiry and evidence
      freshness, pinned issuance and presenter capacity vectors, atomic
      follow-up finalization, deadline-gated authorized recovery, and
      executable contract tests; bounded model results remain explicitly
      non-proof evidence.

   *  Scopes replay to authenticated issuer identity plus nonce, defines
      different-body collision behavior, and excludes challenge_id from
      the security key.

   *  Binds the authenticated returning presenter to the challenge
      audience and requires current exact-action rederivation before
      claim.




Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 31]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   *  Adds duplicate-member rejection, finite pre-cryptographic resource
      limits, deterministic complete-body digesting, interoperable
      integer bounds, explicit conjunction and alternative rules for
      evidence requirements, hint SSRF protections, and satisfiable
      retry-window rules.

   *  Aligns the reference wire with the core's absolute-URI rules,
      rejects malformed nested challenge objects before state
      allocation, and prevents a caller-selected timestamp from
      freshening evidence.

   *  Requires follow-ups to use the current exact action and live
      policy, repeats the complete evidence requirement set unless an
      explicit authenticated continuation profile binds prior evidence
      and state, and removes dependency on an unpublished DMSC section
      number.

   *  Makes the action profile and digest one authenticated security
      binding, requires complete material-field coverage, and pins
      audience namespace and alias semantics for the challenge lifetime.

   *  Makes stateful issuance atomically register the complete body and
      debit every applicable state-cap bucket before exposure, including
      the concurrent last-slot case.

   *  Defines an unambiguous base64url nonce syntax, a total replay-
      collision-expiry ordering, and mandatory transfer of a stateful-
      open debit into the in-flight reservation.

   *  Narrows the HTTP section to a 403 challenge-response carrier,
      aligns Problem Details metadata with RFC 9457, separates 401, 403,
      409, 429, and 503 semantics, and defines Retry-After conversion.

   *  Makes the DMSC material illustrative, closes nested core objects,
      scopes critical extensions to the top level, and adds
      confidentiality and final-action-fencing requirements.

   *  Withdraws the earlier request for application/authorization-
      evidence-challenge+json and reuses application/problem+json for
      HTTP carriage.

10.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.




Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 32]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   [RFC3339]  Klyne, G. and C. Newman, "Date and Time on the Internet:
              Timestamps", RFC 3339, DOI 10.17487/RFC3339, July 2002,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3339>.

   [RFC3986]  Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R. T., and L. Masinter,
              "Uniform Resource Identifier (URI): Generic Syntax",
              STD 66, RFC 3986, DOI 10.17487/RFC3986, January 2005,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3986>.

   [RFC4086]  Eastlake 3rd, D., Schiller, J., and S. Crocker,
              "Randomness Requirements for Security", BCP 106, RFC 4086,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4086, June 2005,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4086>.

   [RFC4648]  Josefsson, S., "The Base16, Base32, and Base64 Data
              Encodings", RFC 4648, DOI 10.17487/RFC4648, October 2006,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4648>.

   [RFC6234]  Eastlake 3rd, D. and T. Hansen, "US Secure Hash Algorithms
              (SHA and SHA-based HMAC and HKDF)", RFC 6234,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6234, May 2011,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6234>.

   [RFC6585]  Nottingham, M. and R. Fielding, "Additional HTTP Status
              Codes", RFC 6585, DOI 10.17487/RFC6585, April 2012,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6585>.

   [RFC8126]  Cotton, M., Leiba, B., and T. Narten, "Guidelines for
              Writing an IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26,
              RFC 8126, DOI 10.17487/RFC8126, June 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8126>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

   [RFC8259]  Bray, T., Ed., "The JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) Data
              Interchange Format", STD 90, RFC 8259,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8259, December 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8259>.

   [RFC9110]  Fielding, R., Ed., Nottingham, M., Ed., and J. Reschke,
              Ed., "HTTP Semantics", STD 97, RFC 9110,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9110, June 2022,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9110>.






Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 33]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   [RFC9111]  Fielding, R. T., Nottingham, M., and J. Reschke, "HTTP
              Caching", RFC 9111, STD 98, DOI 10.17487/RFC9111, June
              2022, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9111>.

   [RFC9457]  Nottingham, M., Wilde, E., and S. Dalal, "Problem Details
              for HTTP APIs", RFC 9457, DOI 10.17487/RFC9457, July 2023,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9457>.

11.  Informative References

   [AEB]      Schrock, I., "The Action Evidence Boundary for
              Consequential Agent Effects", Work in Progress, Internet-
              Draft, draft-schrock-action-evidence-boundary-03, August
              2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-schrock-
              action-evidence-boundary/>.

   [AEC]      Schrock, I., "Authorization Evidence Chains: Composing
              Heterogeneous Agent-Action Evidence (EP-AEC)", Work in
              Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-schrock-ep-authorization-
              evidence-chain-05, August 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-schrock-ep-
              authorization-evidence-chain/>.

   [AUTH-RECEIPTS]
              Schrock, I., "Authorization Receipts for High-Risk Agent
              Actions", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-schrock-
              ep-authorization-receipts-11, 9 August 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-schrock-ep-
              authorization-receipts/>.

   [BCR]      Schrock, I., "Bounded Capability Receipts and Durable
              Spend Control for Agent Actions", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-schrock-ep-bounded-capability-
              receipts-03, August 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-schrock-ep-
              bounded-capability-receipts/>.

   [CAID]     Schrock, I., "The Canonical Action Identifier (CAID)",
              Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-schrock-canonical-
              action-identifier-02, August 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-schrock-canonical-
              action-identifier/>.









Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 34]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   [DMSC-GAPS]
              Dunbar, L., Wang, Y., Schrock, I., and B. Liu, "Deployment
              Scenarios and Gap Analysis for AI Agent Gateway", Work in
              Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-dunbar-dmsc-gw-scenarios-
              gap-analysis-03, August 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-dunbar-dmsc-gw-
              scenarios-gap-analysis/>.

   [KLRC]     Kasselman, P., Lombardo, J., Rosomakho, Y., Campbell, B.,
              Steele, N., and A. Parecki, "AI Agent Authentication and
              Authorization", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-
              klrc-aiagent-auth-03, 6 July 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-klrc-aiagent-
              auth/>.

   [OAUTH-TXN-CHALLENGE]
              Rosomakho, Y., Campbell, B., McGuinness, K., and P.
              Kasselman, "OAuth Transaction Authorization Challenge",
              Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-rosomakho-oauth-
              txn-challenge-00, 25 June 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-rosomakho-oauth-
              txn-challenge/>.

   [RFC9470]  Bertocci, V. and B. Campbell, "OAuth 2.0 Step Up
              Authentication Challenge Protocol", RFC 9470,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9470, September 2023,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9470>.

Appendix A.  Relationship to Existing Mechanisms

   CAID [CAID] is one mechanism for deriving and mapping exact material
   actions.  AEB [AEB] defines executor-side evidence verification,
   refusal, and one-time consumption.  Bounded Capability Receipts [BCR]
   define durable single-domain reservation and consumption.  AEC [AEC]
   is one possible presentation profile.  None is required by the core
   challenge, and the challenge does not extend any of them across
   independently operated admission domains.

   OAuth Transaction Authorization Challenge [OAUTH-TXN-CHALLENGE]
   supplies the OAuth-native choreography and transaction-bound grant
   that this document explicitly does not define.  The KLRC architecture
   [KLRC] describes broader agent authentication and authorization
   requirements, including human-in-the-loop and externalized
   authorization patterns.  Authorization Receipts [AUTH-RECEIPTS] are
   one possible portable human- evidence type that an AE-CHALLENGE can
   request; neither the receipt nor AE-CHALLENGE replaces a native OAuth
   grant or a relying party's final policy decision.




Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 35]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


Author's Address

   Iman Schrock
   EMILIA Protocol, Inc.
   United States of America
   Email: team@emiliaprotocol.ai













































Schrock                 Expires 11 February 2027               [Page 36]
