



Network Working Group                                         I. Schrock
Internet-Draft                                     EMILIA Protocol, Inc.
Intended status: Informational                             9 August 2026
Expires: 10 February 2027


    An Authorization Evidence Challenge for High-Risk Agent Actions
                     draft-schrock-ae-challenge-05

Abstract

   When a relying party refuses a consequential agent action because
   authorization evidence is missing, stale, or unverifiable, the agent
   needs a machine-readable description of what remains necessary.  This
   document defines a transport-neutral Authorization Evidence Challenge
   data model bound to the relying party's exact action.  The challenge
   identifies outstanding evidence requirements, freshness and status
   constraints, acceptable presentation profiles, and retry state.  It
   authorizes nothing, transfers no admission ownership, and provides no
   promise that a later request will execute.

   The document also defines an HTTP binding using 403 Forbidden and RFC
   9457 Problem Details, and describes an informative gateway-handoff
   profile for DMSC-style federation.  The gateway profile communicates
   evidence requirements; it does not solve conserved admission or
   double-admission across independently operated gateways.

   A challenge can synchronize corrected retries and amplify load.  The
   core therefore defines optional retry timing with per-challenge
   jitter, and the HTTP binding maps its lower bound to Retry-After.
   Retry timing controls presentation attempts only; it does not
   authorize the action or make an uncertain action safe to repeat.

   Single-use processing also places state on the refusal path.  The
   core therefore requires bounded outstanding and replay state, fail-
   closed behavior when state cannot be claimed, and retention of live
   replay records until they are no longer security-relevant.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.




Schrock                 Expires 10 February 2027                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 10 February 2027.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.1.  Requirements Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  Transport-Neutral Core Data Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.1.  Action and Policy Binding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     2.2.  Evidence Requirements and Presentation  . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.3.  Lifecycle, Replay, and Retry  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     2.4.  State Bounds and Exhaustion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
       2.4.1.  State Exhaustion Conformance Cases  . . . . . . . . .   9
     2.5.  Extensibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     2.6.  Carrier Semantics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   3.  HTTP Binding  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   4.  Informative DMSC Gateway Profile  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     4.1.  Gateway Conformance Case  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   7.  Interoperability Questions for Review . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   8.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   9.  Changes since -04 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   10. Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   11. Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   Appendix A.  Relationship to Existing Mechanisms  . . . . . . . .  18
   Appendix B.  Implementation Status  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19







Schrock                 Expires 10 February 2027                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


1.  Introduction

   Evidence formats describe artifacts such as receipts, permits,
   attestations, and logs.  They do not by themselves define the live
   interaction that follows when a relying party finds the presented
   evidence insufficient.  Without a common challenge, each agent
   protocol invents its own vocabulary for missing evidence, acceptable
   presentations, freshness, status checking, and retry.

   This document defines the challenge as an application data model,
   independent of HTTP, a particular agent protocol, and any one
   evidence format.  The nearest prior art is OAuth step-up
   authentication [RFC9470], which lets a resource identify stronger
   authentication requirements.  AE-CHALLENGE applies the interaction
   shape to authorization evidence about an exact proposed action.

   A challenge is a refusal with information.  It is not an
   authorization decision, reservation, capability, ownership transfer,
   or promise of execution.  Satisfying it causes the relying party to
   evaluate a new presentation under its live local policy.

1.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

1.2.  Terminology

   Relying party:  The component that decides whether evidence satisfies
      its requirements for a proposed action.

   Presenter:  The agent, gateway, or other component that receives a
      challenge and may later present evidence.

   Exact action:  The relying-party-derived material action that would
      be admitted, including every field its selected action profile
      treats as consequential.

   Challenge:  A single-use, expiring description of evidence still
      required for one exact action.








Schrock                 Expires 10 February 2027                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


2.  Transport-Neutral Core Data Model

   The AE-CHALLENGE-v1 data model is independent of its carrier.  A
   transport binding MUST preserve every member that the relying party
   uses when registering or reconstructing and later consuming the
   challenge.  A binding MUST also provide authenticated integrity and
   peer identification, or carry the challenge in an authenticated
   envelope that provides those properties.

   The JSON format defined by [RFC8259] is the reference serialization
   of the core model.  A non-JSON binding MUST define an unambiguous
   mapping to the same members and value types.

   {
     "@version": "AE-CHALLENGE-v1",
     "challenge_id": "7a3120d1-...",
     "nonce": "<single-use unpredictable value>",
     "action_digest": "sha256:<relying-party-derived digest>",
     "action_profile": "https://example.net/action/payment-v3",
     "audience": "https://gateway-b.example",
     "policy_id": "https://gateway-b.example/policies/high-risk-v4",
     "policy_digest": "sha256:<relying-party policy digest>",
     "required_evidence": [
       {
         "requirement_id": "human-approval",
         "type": "https://example.net/e/authorization-receipt",
         "profiles": ["https://example.net/profiles/receipt-v1"],
         "max_age_sec": 300,
         "status": "current"
       }
     ],
     "present_as": ["https://example.net/p/ep-aec-v1"],
     "obtain_hints": [
       {
         "requirement_id": "human-approval",
         "mechanism": "https://example.net/flows/approval-v1",
         "uri": "https://approver.example/tasks/123"
       }
     ],
     "retry_timing": {
       "not_before": "2026-08-09T23:50:30Z",
       "jitter_sec": 20
     },
     "expires_at": "2026-08-10T00:05:00Z"
   }






Schrock                 Expires 10 February 2027                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


2.1.  Action and Policy Binding

   @version MUST equal AE-CHALLENGE-v1.  A recipient that does not
   implement this version MUST refuse automated processing.

   challenge_id is an opaque correlation identifier.  Authorization
   decisions MUST NOT depend on its global uniqueness.  nonce MUST be
   unpredictable, non-empty, and single-use.  Before exposing a
   challenge, the relying party MUST either register a durable record
   that binds the nonce to the complete challenge body, or protect the
   complete body with an issuer-authenticated, self-describing mechanism
   defined by the applicable profile.  The latter mechanism MUST let the
   relying party reconstruct and validate the exact body without
   trusting presenter-supplied fields.  A bare challenge body carried
   only under a transport session is not a self-describing mechanism
   after that session ends.

   Self-describing issuance can avoid retaining one record for every
   unanswered challenge.  It does not remove single-use state.  On the
   first returned presentation, the relying party still MUST atomically
   claim the nonce in its authoritative replay store before evidence
   evaluation.

   action_digest MUST be computed by the relying party from the exact
   action it would admit.  It MUST NOT be copied from the presenter or
   from presented evidence. action_profile MUST be present, MUST be an
   absolute URI as defined by [RFC3986], and identifies the
   canonicalization or mapping profile used to derive the digest.  It is
   descriptive to the presenter; it does not let the presenter select or
   weaken that profile.  If two parties cannot establish the same
   material action under an understood profile, the challenge cannot
   repair the disagreement and the relying party MUST refuse automated
   admission.

   audience identifies the component that is expected to answer the
   challenge.  A binding or authenticated envelope MUST let the
   presenter establish the challenge issuer.  A relying party processing
   a returned challenge MUST verify the issuer and audience before using
   any obtain hint or disclosing evidence.

   policy_id and policy_digest identify the local policy state from
   which the requirements were derived.  They do not transfer policy
   authority to the presenter.  At evaluation time the relying party
   MUST use its authenticated live policy and MUST NOT use a policy
   supplied in the response.






Schrock                 Expires 10 February 2027                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   Delegation, translation, or task rewriting does not preserve one
   action binding across hops.  Each receiving relying party MUST re-
   evaluate the action it is asked to admit under its own policy and
   action profile.  If that relying party issues a challenge, it MUST
   derive a new action_digest and register its own challenge binding.  A
   prior hop's challenge or decision record MAY be presented as evidence
   or context, but it MUST NOT substitute for the receiving relying
   party's binding to a rewritten action.  A chain of per-hop records
   does not by itself prove that the actions at different hops are
   semantically equivalent.

2.2.  Evidence Requirements and Presentation

   Each required_evidence entry MUST contain a requirement_id and type.
   Requirement identifiers are unique within one challenge and correlate
   requirements with acquisition hints and diagnostics.  Every evidence
   type, evidence profiles entry, and present_as entry MUST be an
   absolute URI as defined by [RFC3986] so that the same identifier has
   portable meaning across transport protocols and conformance corpora.
   Unless the defining specification says otherwise, these identifiers
   are compared as exact strings.  A recipient MUST NOT infer security
   semantics from URI prefixes or substring matches; it uses only
   locally configured semantics for the complete identifier.

   An entry MAY contain profiles, proof_predicates, max_age_sec, and
   status.  Profiles are alternatives acceptable for that requirement.
   max_age_sec is measured at the relying party's evaluation time using
   the issuance or observation time defined by the selected evidence
   profile. status equal to current requires a separately authenticated
   status result satisfying the relying party's freshness policy; it
   does not mean that absence from an unauthenticated revocation list is
   sufficient.

   present_as lists alternative presentation profiles.  The order
   expresses the relying party's preference, not a security ranking.
   Supporting a presentation profile does not imply support for every
   evidence type named by the challenge.  The presenter selects one
   mutually supported profile and includes enough information for the
   relying party to match every component to a requirement.

   obtain_hints are untrusted routing hints.  Following a hint,
   authenticating to its URI, or receiving an "approved" response
   confers no authority at the relying party.  Evidence obtained through
   a hint remains subject to native verification, exact-action matching,
   freshness and status checks, policy evaluation, and one-time
   consumption.  Unknown transports MAY omit obtain hints entirely.





Schrock                 Expires 10 February 2027                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   Capability discovery MAY advertise evidence types, presentation
   profiles, or acquisition mechanisms that an implementation supports.
   Such discovery is not an authorization decision and does not
   establish that any advertised choice is sufficient for a particular
   action.  The relying party MUST determine sufficiency using its
   authenticated local policy at evaluation time.  A cached discovery
   response, a mutually supported profile, or a successful acquisition
   flow MUST NOT waive an unsatisfied local requirement.

2.3.  Lifecycle, Replay, and Retry

   expires_at MUST be an absolute timestamp.  The relying party MUST
   refuse an expired challenge before evidence or policy evaluation.
   Challenge expiry does not extend the validity of any evidence and
   evidence expiry does not extend the challenge.

   Evaluation is ordered: version and structure; authenticated issuer
   and audience; validation of the registered or self-describing body;
   action agreement; expiry; atomic nonce claim; native evidence
   verification; and local policy evaluation.  Malformed input that
   cannot be associated with a registered body or a valid issuer-
   protected self-describing body, or a presentation that does not agree
   with the registered exact action, is refused without claiming a
   nonce.  Once structural and action matching succeed, the nonce MUST
   be claimed atomically before evidence evaluation.

   A concurrent duplicate that arrives after another presentation has
   consumed the nonce, whether that first evaluation is still in flight
   or has completed, MUST be refused as a replay.  It MUST NOT receive a
   second evidence evaluation, an indeterminate result merely because
   the first evaluation is in flight, or a second admission.  An
   implementation MAY distinguish in-flight from completed consumption
   internally for operations and audit, but that distinction does not
   reopen the challenge.

   Every verifier instance that accepts presentations for one challenge
   issuer MUST use the same authoritative replay domain, or a
   deterministic partition in which exactly one authoritative shard owns
   each nonce.  A process-local cache or eventually consistent replica
   does not satisfy atomic nonce claim.  If the authoritative replay
   domain is unavailable or its result is uncertain, the relying party
   MUST refuse without evidence evaluation or admission; it MUST NOT
   fall back to fresh local state.








Schrock                 Expires 10 February 2027                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   If evidence remains missing, stale, or unverifiable, the relying
   party MAY issue a follow-up challenge.  A follow-up MUST use a fresh
   challenge identifier and nonce, MUST remain bound to the same locally
   derived action digest and action profile, and SHOULD list only the
   requirements that remain unsatisfied.  It is a new refusal, not a
   continuation of the consumed nonce.

   retry_timing is OPTIONAL.  When present, it MUST contain a not_before
   Internet timestamp as defined by [RFC3339] and MAY contain a non-
   negative integer jitter_sec.  A presenter that processes this member
   MUST NOT send the challenge response before not_before.  When
   jitter_sec is greater than zero, the presenter SHOULD add an
   independently selected delay between zero and that many seconds.  The
   selected delay SHOULD vary for each challenge and MUST NOT be treated
   as extending expires_at.  The not_before value is only the earliest
   time to present corrected evidence.  It is not a promise of capacity,
   evidence sufficiency, admission, or execution.  After waiting, the
   presenter can receive the same refusal, a different refusal, or an
   overload response.

   A relying party that expects many correlated refusals SHOULD issue
   recipient-specific or challenge-specific retry schedules rather than
   one common retry instant.  It SHOULD provide a jitter interval wide
   enough for its expected population and recovery capacity.  A
   presenter remains responsible for its own backoff and rate limits
   when timing is absent.  A challenge MUST NOT be issued solely to
   signal overload when the carrying protocol has a distinct overload
   response.  If evidence insufficiency and load pressure coexist, retry
   timing can pace the new evidence presentation without changing the
   refusal semantics.  The presenter can therefore spend effort
   acquiring third-party evidence and still be refused or shed after the
   lower bound; timing guidance does not assert which constraint will be
   decisive later.

   Ignoring retry_timing does not make evidence sufficient or authorize
   an action, but it can defeat the issuer's load-control goal.  It does
   not change the semantic meaning of the challenge and therefore MUST
   NOT appear in critical.  An issuer that needs to enforce pacing uses
   carrier-level overload handling, admission control, rate limiting, or
   refusal.  A presenter that cannot establish whether not_before has
   passed MUST NOT infer permission to send early; it uses its local
   backoff policy or declines automated retry.

   Unknown acquisition status, timeout, transport failure, or an
   unverifiable response is indeterminate.  It MUST NOT be interpreted
   as evidence satisfaction or permission to retry an action whose
   effect may already have occurred.




Schrock                 Expires 10 February 2027                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


2.4.  State Bounds and Exhaustion

   A relying party MUST configure a finite aggregate upper bound on
   challenge state retained in one authoritative replay domain.  The
   bound MUST account for outstanding stateful challenges and in-flight
   or consumed replay records.  Where a presenter is authenticated
   before challenge issuance, the relying party SHOULD also apply per-
   presenter and per-audience bounds.  Multi-tenant deployments SHOULD
   apply an administrative bound per tenant so one tenant cannot consume
   the aggregate allowance.

   Admission control for a stateful challenge MUST occur before the
   challenge is exposed.  If the relying party cannot allocate the
   required outstanding record, it MUST NOT issue that challenge.  It
   returns a carrier-appropriate overload or generic refusal without an
   authorization-evidence challenge.

   For self-describing issuance, the relying party MUST enforce the
   replay-state bound when the first returned presentation attempts to
   claim the nonce.  If it cannot durably and atomically claim replay
   state, it MUST refuse without native evidence verification, policy
   evaluation, or admission.  It MUST NOT issue a replacement stateful
   challenge on that path.  Self-describing issuance reduces unanswered
   outstanding state; it does not make replay processing stateless.

   A relying party that knows its authoritative replay-state bound is
   currently exhausted MUST NOT issue a self-describing challenge whose
   return cannot be claimed.  It uses the carrier's overload or generic
   refusal path until capacity is available.

   An implementation MUST NOT evict a live in-flight or consumed nonce
   record to admit a newer challenge.  Such a record MUST remain in the
   authoritative replay domain until the later of expires_at and
   completion of the in-flight evaluation.  Expired unconsumed records
   MAY be removed.  Longer retention for audit or abuse detection is a
   deployment choice.

   Challenge lifetimes SHOULD be no longer than the expected evidence-
   acquisition workflow requires.  Rate limiting, authentication where
   available, self-describing issuance, and short lifetimes can reduce
   state pressure, but none permits fail-open nonce handling.

2.4.1.  State Exhaustion Conformance Cases

   A conforming implementation demonstrates all of the following:

   *  At the outstanding-state cap, a stateful issuer returns no new
      challenge and allocates no additional outstanding record.



Schrock                 Expires 10 February 2027                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   *  At the replay-state cap, a returned self-describing challenge
      receives no evidence evaluation and no admission.

   *  Two verifier replicas concurrently receiving the same nonce
      produce one successful atomic claim and one replay refusal.

   *  Allocating a new challenge never evicts an in-flight or unexpired
      consumed nonce.

2.5.  Extensibility

   Recipients MUST ignore an unknown member unless its name appears in
   the optional critical array.  A recipient that does not understand
   every member named by critical MUST refuse automated processing.  A
   specification defining an extension MUST state whether that extension
   is safe to ignore and how it is bound to the registered challenge
   body.  The core retry_timing member is safe to ignore for challenge
   semantics and MUST NOT be named by critical.

2.6.  Carrier Semantics

   A transport binding SHOULD carry a challenge as a structured refusal
   or error payload when the carrying protocol provides such a facility.
   A binding that uses a message part, task-state extension, or other
   carrier MUST preserve the same refusal semantics and scope the
   challenge to the identified attempt.  It MUST NOT represent the
   challenge as a successful task result, output artifact,
   authorization, or durable state that silently applies to later
   attempts.  These rules constrain carrier semantics without requiring
   every transport to use the same envelope.

3.  HTTP Binding

   An HTTP origin server that refuses an action because authorization
   evidence is missing, stale, or unverifiable SHOULD return 403
   Forbidden as defined by [RFC9110].  The response body MUST be an
   application/problem+json Problem Details object as defined by
   [RFC9457].  Status 428 is not used: it is defined for requests that
   the origin server requires to be conditional, not for authorization-
   evidence negotiation.











Schrock                 Expires 10 February 2027               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   If temporary overload is the sole reason for refusal, the origin
   server MUST NOT fabricate an authorization-evidence challenge.  It
   uses 503 Service Unavailable, or another response appropriate to the
   actual failure, and MAY use Retry-After as defined by [RFC9110].  A
   403 AE-CHALLENGE is appropriate when evidence is actually
   insufficient, including when load pressure also makes pacing the
   corrected presentation necessary.  If the server cannot allocate or
   claim the state required by Section 2.4, it uses 503 and MUST NOT
   include evidence_challenge.

   HTTP/1.1 403 Forbidden
   Content-Type: application/problem+json
   Cache-Control: no-store
   Date: Sun, 09 Aug 2026 23:50:00 GMT
   Retry-After: 30

   {
   "type":"https://iana.org/assignments/http-problem-types#ae-required",
     "title": "Authorization Evidence Required",
     "status": 403,
     "detail": "Required evidence is unavailable.",
     "evidence_challenge": {
       "@version": "AE-CHALLENGE-v1",
       "challenge_id": "7a3120d1-...",
       "nonce": "...",
       "action_digest": "sha256:...",
       "action_profile": "https://example.net/action/payment-v3",
       "audience": "https://agent.example",
       "policy_id": "https://resource.example/policies/high-risk-v4",
       "policy_digest": "sha256:...",
       "required_evidence": [
         { "requirement_id": "human-approval",
           "type": "https://example.net/e/authorization-receipt",
           "max_age_sec": 300,
           "status": "current" }
       ],
       "present_as": ["https://example.net/p/ep-aec-v1"],
       "obtain_hints": [],
       "retry_timing": {
         "not_before": "2026-08-09T23:50:30Z",
         "jitter_sec": 20
       },
       "expires_at": "2026-08-10T00:05:00Z"
     }
   }






Schrock                 Expires 10 February 2027               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   The Problem Details type and title MUST have the values shown above.
   The HTTP status code and the optional status member MUST both be 403.
   The core challenge MUST appear in the evidence_challenge extension
   member.  Human-readable detail text is advisory and MUST NOT be
   parsed for protocol semantics.

   The origin server MUST send Cache-Control: no-store.  A generic
   intermediary can still transform an HTTP response, so a client MUST
   validate the Problem Details object and the authenticated origin
   before acting on hints or presenting evidence.

   When the core challenge contains retry_timing, the origin server
   SHOULD send a Retry-After field as defined by [RFC9110].  Its HTTP-
   date or delay-seconds value MUST NOT permit a follow-up request
   earlier than not_before.  If the header and core member identify
   different lower bounds, a client MUST use the later bound and then
   apply jitter_sec.  Retry-After does not carry the jitter value and
   does not change the challenge expiry, authorize the action, promise
   capacity or acceptance, or make a retry safe after an uncertain
   effect.

4.  Informative DMSC Gateway Profile

   Agent gateways can carry the transport-neutral challenge during
   federation or handoff.  The receiving gateway is the relying party:
   it derives the exact action, applies its own trust anchors and
   policy, and issues a challenge when evidence is missing, stale, or
   unverifiable.  The sending gateway or agent can obtain evidence and
   return a new presentation using a DMSC-defined extension point or
   error carrier.

   If a gateway rewrites or translates the proposed action, the next
   gateway re-evaluates that locally derived action and, when necessary,
   issues its own binding.  The prior gateway's action digest does not
   survive the rewrite as the receiving gateway's binding.  Any claim
   that the two actions are equivalent requires a separately defined
   mapping or transformation proof.

   When a receiving gateway refuses an action because required
   authorization evidence is missing, stale, or unverifiable, it may
   return a structured evidence challenge identifying the exact action,
   outstanding evidence requirements, applicable freshness or status
   constraints, and supported presentation profiles.  The challenge does
   not authorize the action or transfer admission ownership; conserved
   admission across gateway boundaries remains the separate requirement
   described in Section 7.8 of the proposed next revision of
   [DMSC-GAPS].




Schrock                 Expires 10 February 2027               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   In particular, AE-CHALLENGE does not prevent Gateway A and Gateway B
   from admitting the same single-use right.  It does not copy, fence,
   or relinquish consumption state and does not establish which gateway
   owns admission during a partition.  The separate handoff property is
   not a race to decide which gateway admitted first; it is an invariant
   that committed capacity is not over-allocated under any interleaving
   of admissions and releases.  A DMSC handoff profile MUST solve that
   property separately.  If the receiving gateway cannot establish the
   required exclusivity, its safe result is refusal or indeterminate,
   not acceptance based on the challenge.

4.1.  Gateway Conformance Case

   Gateway A forwards a proposed action to Gateway B.  Gateway B derives
   the exact action under its pinned action profile and refuses because
   a current approval artifact is missing.  B returns an AE-CHALLENGE
   bound to B's action digest and local evidence requirement.  A obtains
   and presents the artifact.  B verifies it under B's trust anchors,
   matches it to the same action, and reevaluates B's policy.  The case
   passes only if A never treats the challenge as authorization and B
   refuses an action-digest mismatch, stale status, replayed nonce, or
   unsupported presentation profile.

   A second case attempts concurrent admission of one single-use right
   at both gateways.  AE-CHALLENGE alone MUST NOT be reported as passing
   that case.  The case passes only when a separate conserved-admission
   mechanism establishes exclusivity, or when the receiving gateway
   refuses or returns indeterminate because exclusivity cannot be
   established.

5.  Security Considerations

   *Challenge forgery and evidence exfiltration.* A forged challenge
   cannot authorize an action, but it can redirect a presenter, induce
   unnecessary approval work, or solicit sensitive evidence.  Presenters
   MUST authenticate the relying party and audience before following
   obtain hints or disclosing evidence.  A bare JSON object copied
   outside its authenticated carrier has no origin authenticity.

   *Action substitution.* The relying party computes the challenge
   action digest from the action it would execute and recomputes that
   binding before admission.  A digest supplied by the presenter or an
   action profile selected by the presenter defeats the purpose of the
   protocol.

   *Replay and state exhaustion.* Stateful issuance binds the complete
   body before exposure; self-describing issuance defers storage but
   still requires an atomic replay claim before evidence evaluation.  An



Schrock                 Expires 10 February 2027               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   attacker can provoke refusals cheaply or consume a structurally valid
   challenge.  Aggregate and scoped bounds, short expiries,
   authentication where available, and rate limits are therefore
   required operational controls.  Exhaustion or replay-store
   uncertainty fails closed.  Live replay state is never evicted to make
   room for new work.

   *Replica consistency.* Per-process replay caches permit two verifier
   replicas to accept the same nonce.  Verifiers for one issuer need one
   atomic replay domain or an exclusive deterministic shard.  During
   partition or store failure they refuse rather than create local
   replacement state.

   *Retry synchronization and load amplification.* A precise challenge
   tells a presenter how to correct a request, so a population receiving
   similar refusals can retry in a synchronized burst.  An issuer under
   pressure SHOULD combine recipient-specific retry timing, a non-zero
   jitter interval, admission control, and rate limiting.  A presenter
   SHOULD retain exponential backoff or equivalent local load control
   even when a challenge supplies a lower bound.  Timing guidance paces
   only a new evidence presentation and MUST NOT be interpreted as
   evidence satisfaction, authorization, or a promise that capacity or
   admission will exist after not_before.

   *Information disclosure.* Evidence requirements, policy identifiers,
   action profiles, and obtain hints can reveal sensitive policy
   structure.  A relying party SHOULD disclose only the minimum
   information needed for remediation.  The HTTP binding requires Cache-
   Control: no-store.

   *Stale facts and uncertain effects.* A satisfied challenge proves
   only that the relying party's evidence requirement was met at
   evaluation time.  It does not prove that external facts remain true,
   that an action executed, or that an uncertain action is safe to
   retry.  Status rechecking, execution custody, effect observation, and
   reconciliation remain separate controls.

   *Gateway split brain.* An authenticated challenge from a receiving
   gateway does not transfer a single-use authorization or its
   consumption ledger.  Implementations MUST NOT claim cross-gateway
   double-admission prevention merely because both gateways implement
   this challenge.









Schrock                 Expires 10 February 2027               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


6.  IANA Considerations

   IANA is requested to add the following entry to the "HTTP Problem
   Types" registry established by [RFC9457].  That registry uses the
   Specification Required policy defined by [RFC8126]; this request does
   not require IETF Review or Standards Action.

   Type URI:
      https://iana.org/assignments/http-problem-types#ae-required

   Title:  Authorization Evidence Required

   Recommended HTTP status code:  403

   Reference:  This document.

   This revision withdraws the earlier request for a new application/
   authorization-evidence-challenge+json media type.  The HTTP binding
   reuses the registered application/problem+json media type.  Non-HTTP
   bindings define their own carriage without changing the core data
   model.

7.  Interoperability Questions for Review

   This revision resolves the transport layering, HTTP status and media
   type, gateway-ownership boundary, acquisition-protocol coupling,
   retry synchronization, retry criticality, bounded replay state, and
   per-hop binding questions raised through revision -04.  Review is
   requested on the following remaining choices:

   *  Which Agent2Agent and AgentProto error carriers can preserve the
      complete challenge, authenticated issuer, audience, and retry
      timing, and whether either protocol needs an additional attempt
      identifier.

   *  Whether a DMSC gateway profile should carry the core object
      directly or reference it by an authenticated, digest-bound URI.

8.  Acknowledgments

   Thanks to Sumit P.  Ahuja for identifying synchronized retry and load
   amplification as a consequence of precise challenge guidance, for
   correcting retry criticality and non-promissory timing semantics, and
   for identifying refusal-path state exhaustion.  Thanks to Guigui Wang
   for implementation feedback on structured error payloads, per-hop
   action rebinding, and the separation of capability discovery from
   local authority.  Thanks to Henri Sirkkavaara for review of replay
   ordering, concurrent-presentation behavior, diagnostic ordering, and



Schrock                 Expires 10 February 2027               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   portable identifier semantics.

9.  Changes since -04

   *  Forbids listing retry_timing as critical because it changes
      pacing, not the semantic meaning of the refusal.

   *  States that not_before is a presentation lower bound and no
      promise of capacity, evidence sufficiency, admission, or
      execution.

   *  Defines bounded aggregate and scoped challenge-state limits, cap
      behavior, and fail-closed handling for replay-store
      unavailability.

   *  Permits authenticated self-describing issuance while making clear
      that single-use processing still requires bounded replay state.

   *  Requires one authoritative atomic replay domain across verifier
      replicas and prohibits eviction of live replay state.

   *  Adds state-exhaustion and multi-replica conformance cases.

10.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC3339]  Klyne, G. and C. Newman, "Date and Time on the Internet:
              Timestamps", RFC 3339, DOI 10.17487/RFC3339, July 2002,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3339>.

   [RFC3986]  Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R. T., and L. Masinter,
              "Uniform Resource Identifier (URI): Generic Syntax",
              STD 66, RFC 3986, DOI 10.17487/RFC3986, January 2005,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3986>.

   [RFC8126]  Cotton, M., Leiba, B., and T. Narten, "Guidelines for
              Writing an IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26,
              RFC 8126, DOI 10.17487/RFC8126, June 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8126>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.




Schrock                 Expires 10 February 2027               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   [RFC8259]  Bray, T., Ed., "The JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) Data
              Interchange Format", STD 90, RFC 8259,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8259, December 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8259>.

   [RFC9110]  Fielding, R., Ed., Nottingham, M., Ed., and J. Reschke,
              Ed., "HTTP Semantics", STD 97, RFC 9110,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9110, June 2022,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9110>.

   [RFC9457]  Nottingham, M., Wilde, E., and S. Dalal, "Problem Details
              for HTTP APIs", RFC 9457, DOI 10.17487/RFC9457, July 2023,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9457>.

11.  Informative References

   [AEB]      Schrock, I., "The Action Evidence Boundary for
              Consequential Agent Effects", Work in Progress, Internet-
              Draft, draft-schrock-action-evidence-boundary-03, August
              2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-schrock-
              action-evidence-boundary/>.

   [AEC]      Schrock, I., "Authorization Evidence Chains: Composing
              Heterogeneous Agent-Action Evidence (EP-AEC)", Work in
              Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-schrock-ep-authorization-
              evidence-chain-05, August 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-schrock-ep-
              authorization-evidence-chain/>.

   [BCR]      Schrock, I., "Bounded Capability Receipts and Durable
              Spend Control for Agent Actions", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-schrock-ep-bounded-capability-
              receipts-03, August 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-schrock-ep-
              bounded-capability-receipts/>.

   [CAID]     Schrock, I., "The Canonical Action Identifier (CAID)",
              Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-schrock-canonical-
              action-identifier-02, August 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-schrock-canonical-
              action-identifier/>.










Schrock                 Expires 10 February 2027               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   [DMSC-GAPS]
              Dunbar, L., Wang, Y., Schrock, I., and B. Liu, "Deployment
              Scenarios and Gap Analysis for AI Agent Gateway", Work in
              Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-dunbar-dmsc-gw-scenarios-
              gap-analysis-03, August 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-dunbar-dmsc-gw-
              scenarios-gap-analysis/>.

   [RFC9470]  Bertocci, V. and B. Campbell, "OAuth 2.0 Step Up
              Authentication Challenge Protocol", RFC 9470,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9470, September 2023,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9470>.

Appendix A.  Relationship to Existing Mechanisms

   CAID [CAID] is one mechanism for deriving and mapping exact material
   actions.  AEB [AEB] defines executor-side evidence verification,
   refusal, and one-time consumption.  Bounded Capability Receipts [BCR]
   define durable single-domain reservation and consumption.  AEC [AEC]
   is one possible presentation profile.  None is required by the core
   challenge, and the challenge does not extend any of them across
   independently operated admission domains.

Appendix B.  Implementation Status

   The EMILIA Protocol repository contains a same-team reference
   implementation of the AE-CHALLENGE-v1 core lifecycle, including
   relying-party-derived action binding, policy-derived requirements,
   durable body-bound registration, single-use consumption, expiry,
   follow-up challenges, and action-swap refusal.  Revision -03 added a
   serializer and parser for the RFC 9457 HTTP binding and tests that
   pin status 403, application/problem+json, Cache-Control: no-store,
   and the evidence_challenge extension.

   Revision -04 specifies retry timing, per-hop rebinding, discovery
   separation, carrier semantics, portable absolute-URI identifiers, and
   action-before-consumption replay ordering.  These additions are based
   in part on external implementer review, including experience with
   structured error payloads and per-verifier decision bindings.  They
   are not yet implemented by the same-team reference implementation and
   are not claimed as an independent implementation of this
   specification.









Schrock                 Expires 10 February 2027               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft             Evidence Challenge                August 2026


   Revision -05 adds optional self-describing issuance, mandatory state
   bounds and cap behavior, authoritative replay-domain requirements,
   and state-exhaustion conformance cases.  The same-team implementation
   uses durable stateful issuance and atomic consumption across workers
   and restarts, but does not yet implement the -05 configurable cap
   behavior or self-describing issuance path.  No implementation claim
   is made for those additions.

   This is same-team implementation evidence.  No independent
   implementation or interoperability is claimed.  The implementation
   does not yet provide a DMSC carrier or conserved-admission mechanism.
   Its current local evidence and presentation identifiers are not the
   absolute URIs required by this revision.

Author's Address

   Iman Schrock
   EMILIA Protocol, Inc.
   United States of America
   Email: team@emiliaprotocol.ai































Schrock                 Expires 10 February 2027               [Page 19]
