



Network Working Group                                         I. Schrock
Internet-Draft                                     EMILIA Protocol, Inc.
Intended status: Informational                         25 September 2026
Expires: 29 March 2027


      The Action Evidence Boundary for Consequential Agent Effects
               draft-schrock-action-evidence-boundary-07

Abstract

   Consequential agent actions can cross identity, transport,
   authorization, policy, and execution systems.  Each system can
   produce a valid artifact while the executor still lacks a safe rule
   for joining the artifacts to the exact effect, consuming one-time
   authority, and handling an uncertain outcome.  This document defines
   the Action Evidence Boundary (AEB), an executor-side processing model
   for that lifecycle.

   AEB requires native artifact verification, exact-action binding, a
   relying-party authorization decision, durable atomic consumption or
   reservation, provider entry, closed effect outcomes, and
   authenticated reconciliation.  One grant of native authority is
   identified by a relying-party-pinned authority namespace, which
   defaults to its issuer, and its native authorization identifier, so
   rewrapping or relabelling the grant cannot make it spendable twice.
   A durable same-action fence refuses a new attempt for an action whose
   earlier attempt is still in flight or uncertain, whatever evidence
   path admits it and even when fresh authority is presented.  An
   attempt that stopped before provider entry is released only with
   proof that it never entered.  AEB also specifies what a gateway
   attests, and what the boundary verifies, when a native authorization
   result is handed to a separate effect boundary.  Canonical Action
   Identifier (CAID) matching is used when independently encoded native
   representations must be joined.  Authorization Evidence Chain (AEC)
   evaluation is used when local policy requires multiple evidence legs.
   A native authorization decision accepted and enforced by the effect-
   owning policy enforcement point (PEP) does not require a second
   policy decision point (PDP).  AEB defines no receipt or token format,
   no policy language, no universal evidence taxonomy, and no new
   registry.  Native workload credentials, OAuth artifacts, AuthZEN
   decisions, Agent Payments Protocol (AP2) mandates, message
   signatures, permits, authorization receipts, and status mechanisms
   retain their own semantics and, where the native protocol defines
   one, their own verifiers.






Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 29 March 2027.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.1.  Scope and Non-Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   2.  Conventions and Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   3.  Non-Collapsing Decision and Lifecycle Vocabulary  . . . . . .   8
   4.  Relying-Party Inputs and Pins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   5.  Required Processing Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     5.1.  Construct the Observed Material Action  . . . . . . . . .  11
     5.2.  Verify Each Native Artifact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     5.3.  Establish Exact-Action Correspondence . . . . . . . . . .  13
     5.4.  Evaluate Required Field-Origin Assertions . . . . . . . .  14
     5.5.  Evaluate Additional Evidence Requirements When
            Required . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     5.6.  Pinned Boundary Requirement and Evaluation Record . . . .  15
     5.7.  Make the Local Authorization Decision . . . . . . . . . .  17
     5.8.  Accept a Native Authorization Handoff . . . . . . . . . .  17



Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


     5.9.  Derive the Native Replay Identity . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
     5.10. Hold the Same-Action In-Flight Fence  . . . . . . . . . .  20
     5.11. Atomically Consume or Reserve Before Invocation . . . . .  24
     5.12. Enter the Provider with the Frozen Effect . . . . . . . .  25
     5.13. Classify the Effect Outcome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
     5.14. Perform Authenticated Reconciliation  . . . . . . . . . .  28
   6.  Declaration and Challenge Semantics . . . . . . . . . . . . .  30
   7.  Native Evidence and Transport Boundaries  . . . . . . . . . .  30
     7.1.  WIMSE and HTTP Message Signatures . . . . . . . . . . . .  30
     7.2.  AuthZEN and COAZ  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  31
     7.3.  Attested Per-Action Tokens and Permit Records . . . . . .  32
   8.  Native Compilation Contract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  33
     8.1.  Pinned Inputs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  34
     8.2.  Deterministic Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  35
     8.3.  Closed Compile Result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  35
     8.4.  Semantic-Loss Report  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  36
     8.5.  Stable Native Replay Unit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  37
     8.6.  Path and Provider Ownership . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  37
     8.7.  Compilation Conformance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  38
   9.  Conformance and Deployment Claims . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  39
   10. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  40
   11. Privacy Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  44
   12. Relationship to EMILIA and Adjacent Work  . . . . . . . . . .  45
   13. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  46
   14. Changes since -06 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  46
   15. Implementation Status . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  48
   16. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  51
     16.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  52
     16.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  52
   Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  55
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  55

1.  Introduction

   A remote executor can receive several independently useful inputs: a
   workload credential and protected request, a delegation or
   capability, a pre-execution permit, a human-authorization artifact,
   and a policy decision.  None of those inputs alone answers every
   question the consequence-owning system has to answer before changing
   its system of record.











Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   The missing contract is at the effect boundary after authorization.
   The executor must determine what exact material action it is about to
   perform; verify each native artifact; preserve the authorization
   result produced by the selected native path; correlate independently
   encoded representations without guessing when such a join is
   required; derive a native replay identity; refuse a second attempt
   for an action that is already in flight; consume or reserve any one-
   time or bounded authority; enter the provider once; and preserve
   uncertainty when the effect cannot be observed conclusively.

   This document defines that contract.  Its required order is:

    native verification, or verification of a
    native authorization handoff
           |
           v
    exact-action correspondence
    (native binding, or CAID for a cross-format join)
           |
           v
    additional evidence SATISFIED when required
    (AEC for a multi-leg requirement)
           |
           v
    native PEP or local AUTHORIZED
           |
           v
    native replay identity
    (authority namespace, authorization identifier)
           |
           v
    same-action fence check and atomic CONSUMED / RESERVED
           |
           v
    durable DISPATCH_PENDING at provider entry
           |
           v
    INVOKED
           |
           +-> EXECUTED        (action key stays closed)
           +-> FAILED          (action key released)
           +-> INDETERMINATE   (action key held)
                     |
                     v
           authenticated reconciliation

    (a pre-entry stop is released only by authorized
     recovery with proof that it never entered)



Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   The Canonical Action Identifier (CAID) [CAID] and Authorization
   Evidence Chain (AEC) [AEC] stages are conditional.  A native
   authorization path can bind one operation directly and satisfy the
   relying party without a cross-format join or a multi-leg requirement.
   A signature is not authority.  Native verification is not action
   correlation.  Action correlation is not evidence satisfaction.
   Evidence satisfaction is not authorization.  Authorization is not
   provider entry or execution.  An invocation error is not proof that
   no effect occurred.

   Two separate controls stop a duplicate effect.  The native replay
   identity stops one grant of authority from being spent twice.  The
   same-action fence stops two grants from being spent on one action
   while the outcome of the first attempt is unknown.  The second
   control matters whenever a native decision service can issue a fresh
   permit for each evaluation of an identical request, or new evidence
   can be assembled for an identical action, so it applies on every
   evidence path.

1.1.  Scope and Non-Goals

   AEB specifies processing requirements for a boundary that controls a
   consequential effect.  It can be implemented at a protocol gateway,
   service mesh component, application middleware, execution adapter, or
   system-of-record write path, provided the deployment states which
   effect paths the boundary actually mediates.

   AEB does not define:

   *  a new authorization receipt, access token, attestation token,
      permit, credential, or execution-evidence format, or an encoding
      for the native authorization handoff of Section 5.8;

   *  a native signature, credential, revocation, status, or
      transparency verification algorithm;

   *  a policy language, universal authorization decision, or universal
      human-approval inference;

   *  a second policy decision point, a replacement for an existing
      protocol-to-authorization mapping, or a requirement that an
      authorization result be re-decided under AEB;

   *  general semantic equivalence between actions;

   *  provider truth, physical truth, legality, safety, wisdom, or
      complete mediation merely because an AEB implementation is
      present; or



Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   *  a registry for evidence types, states, action mappings, or
      verifier names.

2.  Conventions and Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

   BCP 14 is indexed by the RFC Editor at [BCP14].

   Effect boundary:  The last control point that can withhold the
      protected mutation before it is submitted to the effecting system.

   Relying party:  The party that selects trust inputs, action
      definitions, mapping profiles, evidence requirements, freshness
      rules, and local authorization policy, and that relies on the
      resulting decision.

   Policy decision point (PDP):  A component that evaluates an
      authorization request and returns a decision, for example an
      AuthZEN PDP [AUTHZEN-API].

   Policy enforcement point (PEP):  A component that requests or
      receives an authorization decision and enforces it on the
      operation it controls.

   Effect-owning PEP:  The PEP whose enforcement gates the protected
      effect path.  It is either the effect boundary itself or a
      component, such as a protocol gateway, whose acceptance of a
      native authorization result reaches the effect boundary only
      through a native authorization handoff.

   Native artifact:  An evidence, credential, permit, token, receipt,
      status, or message-protection object defined outside AEB and
      verified under its own specification.

   Native authorization result:  A permit or refusal produced under the
      selected authorization protocol and enforced by its PEP.  The
      native protocol remains authoritative for the mapping, decision,
      and enforcement semantics it defines.

   Native operation profile:  The relying-party-pinned profile of one






Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


      native authorization path.  It defines the exact operation
      representation, the material-field inventory, the action-digest
      construction, any instance field, the effecting target identity,
      and the native authorization identifier used for replay identity.

   Native authorization handoff:  An integrity-protected statement, made
      by a relying-party-pinned gateway or PEP, that it accepted one
      native permit for one exact action, delivered to an effect
      boundary that did not itself evaluate the native artifact.

   Field-origin assertion:  A native artifact in which an issuer asserts
      how exact fields of an action representation were sourced or
      transformed, and optionally the point-in-time snapshot on which
      that assertion rests.  Verification establishes the issuer's
      signed assertion under pinned trust inputs; it does not
      independently establish where the bytes truly originated.

   Observed action:  The immutable material action constructed by the
      effect boundary from executor-controlled parsing and system-of-
      record facts.

   Material field:  A field whose change can alter the protected
      consequence, as declared by the material-field inventory of the
      relying-party-pinned native operation profile and, when a cross-
      format join is selected, by the selected CAID action-type
      definition.  When both apply, a field that either declares
      material is material.  Operation identifiers, idempotency keys,
      and wrapper, session, trace, challenge, and caller retry
      identifiers are not material fields.

   Instance field:  A material field that a native operation profile
      declares so that intentionally repeated actions with otherwise
      identical material fields remain distinct, for example a payment
      instance identifier.

   Action digest:  The digest of the frozen observed action under the
      pinned native operation profile.  It covers every material field,
      including any instance field, and no other field.

   Action instance:  The material action identified by one action
      digest.  Attempts with the same action digest are attempts on the
      same action instance.

   Effecting target identity:  The identity of the system that the
      boundary invokes for the protected effect, as defined by the
      native operation profile or, when the profile does not define it,
      the provider, provider account, tenant, and environment that the
      boundary invokes.



Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   Authority namespace:  A relying-party-pinned identifier for the scope
      within which an issuer's native authorization identifiers denote
      distinct grants.  By default it is the verified issuer value.
      Changing it changes the native replay identity of every grant
      accepted under it.

   Native replay identity:  The identity of one grant of native
      authority, derived under Section 5.9 from the authority namespace
      and the native authorization identifier.  This document also calls
      it the native replay unit.

   Action key:  The tuple of relying party, effecting target identity,
      and action digest that the same-action fence of Section 5.10
      protects.

   Pre-entry stop:  An attempt that stopped before its durable record
      reached DISPATCH_PENDING, or before any attempt record was
      written, so that no dispatch to the effecting system could have
      begun.

   Invocation:  The first dispatch of the frozen authorized action to a
      component that can cause the protected effect.

   Authoritative reconciliation:  An authenticated, audience-bound
      observation from the effecting provider or system of record that
      is matched to the original action and operation identifier.

3.  Non-Collapsing Decision and Lifecycle Vocabulary

   AEB uses the following decisions with the meanings established by the
   EMILIA architecture and its component drafts:

   VERIFIED:  One native artifact passed its native verifier under
      relying-party-selected trust inputs.

   MATCH:  Independently verified artifacts denote the same material
      action directly or under exact relying-party-pinned CAID mapping
      profiles.  This state is needed when the boundary joins
      independently encoded representations; it is not an extra
      requirement for a single native representation whose exact-action
      binding is preserved through provider entry.

   SATISFIED:  Verified and matched evidence fills every slot in the
      relying party's AEC requirement.  This state applies when local
      policy selects a multi-leg AEC requirement.

   AUTHORIZED:  The effect-owning PEP accepts a native authorization




Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


      result, or the consequence-owning relying party's local policy
      permits, this exact action at this time.  When the effect-owning
      PEP is not the effect boundary, the boundary learns of that
      acceptance only through a verified native authorization handoff.
      AEB records this result; it does not require a second PDP.

   EXECUTED:  The executor records, or an accepted native artifact
      attests, that the exact effect occurred.  This meaning remains
      bounded by the native source and its trust assumptions.

   AEB also names operational lifecycle states:

   CONSUMED:  A one-time authorization, challenge, operation key, or
      equivalent native replay identity has been durably made
      unavailable for another invocation.

   RESERVED:  Bounded state, such as a capability budget, has been
      durably fenced for the exact operation before invocation.

   DISPATCH_PENDING:  A durable intent record binds the frozen action,
      operation identifier, provider environment, and reservation before
      any effecting dispatch can occur.  Recovery treats a stranded
      intent as uncertain, not as unused authority.

   INVOKED:  The protected effect was dispatched using the frozen
      authorized action and operation identifier.

   FAILED:  Authoritative executor or reconciliation evidence
      establishes that the invoked operation did not cause the protected
      effect.  A local exception or timeout alone is not sufficient.

   INDETERMINATE:  Invocation began, but available authoritative
      evidence does not establish whether the protected effect occurred.

   CONSUMED, RESERVED, DISPATCH_PENDING, INVOKED, FAILED, and
   INDETERMINATE are lifecycle terms, not new evidence types or IANA
   registry values.  A deployment MAY use different local labels if
   their semantics are at least as strict.  For example, an
   implementation that labels the interval between DISPATCH_PENDING and
   a recorded outcome as INVOKING applies the INVOKED rules to it.

4.  Relying-Party Inputs and Pins

   The requester, presenter, agent, and mutable intermediary context are
   untrusted inputs.  They MAY propose an action and present native
   artifacts.  They MUST NOT select or weaken the controls used to
   accept that request.




Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   Before evaluating an action, the relying party MUST configure or pin,
   as applicable:

   *  the supported native artifact revisions, verifier adapters,
      algorithms, trust anchors, issuers, audiences, and status sources;

   *  for each native authorization path, the native operation profile,
      including its operation representation, material-field inventory,
      action-digest construction, any instance field, and effecting
      target identity;

   *  for each accepted native authorization source, the issuer, its
      authority namespace, and the native authorization identifier the
      source supplies;

   *  when a native authorization handoff is accepted, each gateway
      identity and verification key, the source labels and issuers
      accepted from that gateway, the handoff encoding and signature
      profile, the maximum handoff age, and the status source for
      handoff revocation;

   *  when field-origin evidence is required, the accepted assertion
      profile and digest, trusted issuers and keys, allowed origin
      classes and transformations for each exact field, snapshot policy,
      maximum snapshot age, and unavailable-state behavior;

   *  when independently encoded representations require a cross-format
      join, the CAID suite, action-type definition source, exact source
      descriptors, and mapping-profile digests;

   *  when local policy requires multiple evidence legs, the AEC
      requirement and the admissible native evidence roles for each
      slot;

   *  local policy identifiers, policy epochs, tenant and organization
      boundaries, and any separation-of-duty rule;

   *  the trusted clock, maximum ages, validity windows, allowed skew,
      and revocation or status freshness requirements;

   *  the durable replay, consumption, reservation, operation-key, and
      same-action fence namespaces; and

   *  the protected executor, provider environment, reconciliation
      endpoint, and authenticated provider or system-of-record
      identities.





Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   One issuer MUST have exactly one authority namespace in a pin set,
   whether its pins differ in native system or profile label or in
   gateway.  Pins whose issuer values are identical, or are equal after
   normalization, MUST all resolve to the same authority namespace:
   either every such pin omits a declaration and carries one identical
   issuer value, or every such pin declares the same authority
   namespace.  A pin set MUST be refused when it is configured if it
   declares two different authority namespaces for one issuer value,
   mixes declared and default namespaces for one issuer value, or
   contains issuer values that differ but are equal after normalization
   without one shared declared namespace.  For an issuer value that is a
   URI, normalization at least lowercases the scheme.  For a URL with a
   host, it also lowercases the host, removes a trailing dot from the
   host, removes a port that is the default for the scheme, and removes
   trailing slashes from the path, and it reads an http or https URL
   written without the "//" that introduces the authority, such as
   "https:a.example", as the same URL written with it.  Normalization
   cannot detect every alias; two issuer values that denote one
   authority but do not normalize equal need an explicitly shared
   authority namespace.

   Changing the authority namespace of an accepted source, or the issuer
   value of a pin that uses the default namespace, changes the native
   replay identity of every grant accepted under it, so a grant already
   consumed or in flight under the old value could be admitted again.
   Before such a change, the relying party MUST resolve every attempt in
   flight under the old value and MUST ensure that no grant consumed
   under it can still be presented, for example by waiting until those
   grants expire or by revoking them.

   A label, key, profile identifier, requirement, status assertion, or
   policy identifier carried only in presenter-controlled data MUST NOT
   become its own trust anchor.  Missing, conflicting, unsupported, or
   ambiguous required configuration MUST fail closed.

5.  Required Processing Model

5.1.  Construct the Observed Material Action

   The effect boundary MUST construct an immutable observed action from
   effect-relevant facts it controls.  Depending on the application,
   those facts can include the protocol operation, tool or method,
   target resource, tenant, account, amount, currency, destination,
   environment, input digest, and any instance field declared by the
   native operation profile.






Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   The boundary MUST resolve the relying-party-pinned native operation
   profile used for authorization and include every field in that
   profile's material-field inventory.  When a cross-format join is
   required, it MUST also resolve a relying-party-pinned CAID action-
   type definition and include every field that definition declares
   material.  It MUST NOT copy a requester-supplied action digest, CAID,
   amount, destination, or resource reference without deriving or
   checking the corresponding fact at the protected boundary.  If the
   boundary cannot determine all material fields required by the
   selected native or cross-format profile, it MUST refuse before
   invocation.

   The boundary MUST bind the operation identifier to the attempt, not
   to the action.  The operation identifier, a provider idempotency key,
   and wrapper, session, trace, challenge, and caller retry identifiers
   MUST NOT be inputs to the action digest.  Two attempts whose material
   fields are equal therefore have the same action digest, unless the
   native operation profile declares an instance field and the attempts
   carry different values for it.

   The observed action MUST be frozen for the remainder of the
   lifecycle.  A later adapter MUST NOT reconstruct a different action
   from mutable request state after authorization.

   When emitting or comparing a CAID, the boundary MUST validate the
   constructed action against the complete pinned action-type
   definition.  A source representation is construction-compatible only
   when a pinned mapping can derive every material target field without
   guessing.  Construction compatibility is distinct from content
   equivalence: compatible inputs can still map to different actions,
   while a missing, ambiguous, or unverified material field yields
   INDETERMINATE.  A boundary that does not perform a cross-format join
   still MUST preserve the native protocol's exact-operation binding
   through provider entry.

5.2.  Verify Each Native Artifact

   Each required native artifact MUST be verified independently under
   its own specification and relying-party-selected trust inputs before
   CAID mapping or AEC evaluation.  The AEB implementation MUST use the
   integrity-protected payload returned by the native verifier, or a
   projection for which the adapter establishes integrity coverage of
   every projected field.

   A successful signature check is only one possible step of native
   verification.  Schema, algorithm, issuer, audience, key status,
   validity, proof-of-possession, freshness, replay, and native policy
   checks remain those of the selected native profile.  A verifier



Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   exception, unavailable required status source, unsupported critical
   field, or ambiguous result MUST become a bounded refusal, never an
   allow path.

   When the effect boundary is not the effect-owning PEP, the boundary
   does not receive or re-verify the native artifact.  The input it
   verifies is the native authorization handoff, under Section 5.8, and
   the trust basis for the native decision is then the pinned gateway
   rather than the native issuer.  A native permit forwarded without
   integrity protection that the boundary can verify under relying-party
   pins MUST NOT be accepted as a native authorization result.

   The output of this stage is VERIFIED for each accepted artifact.  An
   artifact that has not reached VERIFIED MUST NOT participate in a
   selected action mapping or fill a selected AEC requirement slot.

5.3.  Establish Exact-Action Correspondence

   The boundary MUST establish that the exact operation authorized by
   the selected native path is the operation that will enter the
   provider.  When both are expressed in one native representation, the
   boundary MAY use the exact native identifier, digest, or protected
   operation fields defined by that protocol.

   A native authorization result covers only the inputs that its native
   decision evaluated.  When the native path projects the operation into
   a decision request, as a COAZ mapping [AUTHZEN-COAZ] does, the
   boundary MUST establish that every material field of the observed
   action is either projected by the pinned mapping and covered by the
   native PEP's check that the evaluated operation is unchanged when the
   permit is applied, or enforced by a separate relying-party-pinned
   check at the effect-owning PEP or at the boundary.  A material field
   that meets neither condition makes exact-action correspondence
   INDETERMINATE, and the boundary MUST refuse before consumption,
   reservation, or provider entry.  The binding of the full executor
   action comes from the effect-owning PEP's own enforcement or from a
   native authorization handoff over the full action digest, never from
   the permit alone.

   When the boundary joins independently encoded representations, it
   MUST recompute the CAID of the observed action under the selected
   suite and definition source.  It MUST compare every action-bound
   required artifact to that observed action using direct CAID equality
   or the Action-Mapping Profile defined by [CAID].

   Cross-format mapping MUST occur only after native verification and
   MUST use the exact source media type, schema version, target action
   type, definition source, and mapping-profile digest pinned by the



Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   relying party.  Every target material field MUST be covered.
   Missing, lossy, unknown, unpinned, conflicting, or ambiguous mappings
   yield INDETERMINATE under CAID and MUST fail a required MATCH.  AEB
   MUST NOT guess equivalence from names, natural-language descriptions,
   trace identifiers, or presenter assertions.

   CAID is conditional machinery for a cross-format join, not a second
   authorization protocol.  MATCH is content correlation only.  It does
   not validate a native artifact and does not authorize execution.

5.4.  Evaluate Required Field-Origin Assertions

   A relying party MAY require a natively verified field-origin
   assertion for selected fields before admission.  This document
   defines the processing contract for that input, not a field-origin
   wire format, origin taxonomy, scanner, or transformation language.

   The boundary MUST verify the assertion under the relying party's
   pinned native verifier, issuer and key, assertion profile and digest,
   action binding, field selectors, accepted origin classes, accepted
   transformation definitions, snapshot policy, freshness bound, and
   status inputs.  The verifier output MUST bind each asserted field to
   the exact observed action or to a lossless, pinned mapping to that
   action.  A profile identifier or origin label carried only by the
   presenter MUST NOT select its own verifier or trust root.

   A verified assertion establishes that the pinned issuer made the
   signed claim.  It does not independently prove source truth, semantic
   correctness, absence of prompt injection, authorization, settlement,
   or the truth of a later physical effect.  If policy requires an
   origin constraint for a material field, a missing assertion, unknown
   or disallowed origin, unpinned transformation, stale or unreliable
   required snapshot, action mismatch, or unavailable required status
   MUST withhold admission.  The boundary MUST preserve the distinction
   between assertion verification and acceptance under local policy.

   A field-origin policy SHOULD be discriminating rather than a blanket
   prohibition on untrusted content.  For example, it can refuse an
   untrusted message that selects a payee or destination while accepting
   the same origin class for a bounded non-authoritative memo field.
   The accepted and refused field classes are relying-party policy, not
   universal AEB semantics.

   EP-FIELD-ORIGIN-v0.1 and its finance-operations Gap 6 runner are an
   informative reference implementation profile [EP-FIELD-ORIGIN].  They
   do not become a mandatory AEB format and their same-team results are
   not independent implementation evidence.




Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


5.5.  Evaluate Additional Evidence Requirements When Required

   AEB does not require an AEC evaluation when one native authorization
   result, enforced by the effect-owning PEP, satisfies the relying
   party's complete requirement.  When local policy requires multiple
   evidence legs, the boundary MUST submit only natively verified,
   action-matched evidence to an AEC verifier configured with the
   relying party's requirement.  The requirement used for the decision
   MUST come from relying-party configuration, not from a presenter-
   controlled AEC member.

   Every required evidence role MUST be filled by an artifact whose
   native verifier and adapter are accepted for that role.  A workload
   identity MUST NOT silently fill a policy-permit or human-
   authorization slot.  A machine-policy decision MUST NOT silently fill
   a named-human slot.  A generic operator signature MUST NOT be
   interpreted as evidence that a human operated a system or performed a
   named approval ceremony.

   When AEC is selected, only a successful evaluation under these inputs
   reaches SATISFIED.  UNSATISFIED, malformed, unsupported, or ambiguous
   results MUST withhold invocation.  AEB MUST NOT insert an AEC leg
   merely to re-decide or relabel one native PDP result.

   A qualification statement can fill an evaluation-evidence role only
   when its native verifier establishes the measured candidate,
   evaluation campaign, assignment, policy, freshness, and status.  A
   qualification result MUST NOT fill an authorization role and MUST NOT
   by itself cause SATISFIED, AUTHORIZED, reservation, or invocation.

5.6.  Pinned Boundary Requirement and Evaluation Record

   The consequence-owning relying party MUST pin every adapter revision,
   trust root, mapping profile, evidence requirement, and boundary
   constraint used for a decision.  The presenter MUST NOT select or
   weaken those inputs.  EP-AEB-REQUIREMENT-v1 is an optional closed
   object for a deployment that selects AEC and multiple evidence roles.
   It is not required for a single native authorization path.  Its
   members are:

   @version:  The string EP-AEB-REQUIREMENT-v1.

   all_of:  An array of distinct evidence-role names.  Every listed role
      MUST be filled by a satisfied leg.

   any_of:  OPTIONAL.  An array of non-empty groups, each an array of
      distinct evidence-role names.  Each group MUST have at least one
      of its roles filled by a satisfied leg.



Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   terms:  A non-empty array of boundary constraints, defined below.

   The object MUST name at least one evidence role through a non-empty
   all_of, a non-empty any_of, or a distinct-human-quorum term.  An
   implementation MUST reject any other member.  For example:

   {
     "@version": "EP-AEB-REQUIREMENT-v1",
     "all_of": ["human-authorization", "policy-permit"],
     "terms": [
       { "type": "distinct-human-quorum",
         "role": "human-authorization", "threshold": 2 },
       { "type": "initiator-exclusion",
         "roles": ["human-authorization"] },
       { "type": "executor-exclusion",
         "roles": ["human-authorization"] },
       { "type": "one-time-consumption" }
     ]
   }

   An implementation of this optional object MUST reject unknown terms.
   It MUST require exactly one one-time-consumption term.  A distinct-
   human-quorum term names one role and a threshold of at least 2,
   appears at most once for a role, and counts only distinct natural-
   person subject identifiers exposed by eligible native verifiers for
   that role. initiator-exclusion and executor-exclusion each appear at
   most once and compare those verified subjects with the boundary-owned
   initiator and executor identifiers.  An evidence-binding term names a
   source_role, a different target_role, and require_same_subject with
   the value true; it is met only when a satisfied source-role leg
   carries a native binding to the evidence digest of a satisfied
   target-role leg and both legs expose the same verified subject.
   Different encodings of one key or subject MUST NOT count as different
   humans.

   Execution-time evaluation MUST resolve current status through
   relying-party-configured status sources.  Presenter-supplied current
   status is untrusted.  Revoked, expired, stale, unavailable,
   ambiguous, or unauthenticated required status MUST withhold
   authorization.  Historical re-performance MUST be labeled historical
   and MUST NOT be used as a current execution decision.

   The evaluator SHOULD emit a signed, re-derivable record binding the
   observed action and, when selected, its CAID; operation and
   consumption identifiers, initiator and executor, adapter and mapping
   revisions, complete requirement and configuration digests, native
   artifact digests, current-status snapshots, per-leg VERIFIED and
   MATCH results, AEC SATISFIED, boundary constraints, and the separate



Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   AUTHORIZED or REFUSED verdict, as applicable.  A record that omits a
   conditional CAID or AEC stage MUST identify the native exact-
   operation binding and the reason the extra stage was not selected.
   The record is evidence of the evaluator's decision; it does not
   itself perform or authorize an effect.

5.7.  Make the Local Authorization Decision

   The effect-owning PEP MUST establish AUTHORIZED before consumption,
   reservation, or provider entry.  It can do so by accepting and
   enforcing the selected native authorization result, or by making a
   separate local decision.  AEB does not require a second PDP.  If the
   native path is AuthZEN, the AuthZEN PDP decision and the PEP's
   enforcement of that decision remain authoritative under the selected
   AuthZEN and COAZ profile.  When the effect-owning PEP is not the
   effect boundary, AUTHORIZED reaches the boundary only as a verified
   native authorization handoff (Section 5.8).

   The PEP MUST apply the exact operation, audience, tenant,
   organization, policy epoch, freshness, current credential and
   authority status, separation-of-duty rules, local risk controls, and
   bounded capability state required by that selected path.  Additional
   local checks, at the PEP or at the boundary, MAY narrow a native
   permit.  They MUST NOT widen it, reinterpret a refusal as a permit,
   or claim that AEB issued the native decision.

   Credential revocation and per-action authorization evidence answer
   different questions.  A current non-revocation or status result can
   establish that a credential remains acceptable under local policy; it
   does not prove that the credential holder authorized this action.  A
   per-action authorization artifact does not prove that every
   credential in its trust path remains current.  When policy requires
   both, the boundary MUST verify both without substituting one for the
   other.

   The boundary reaches AUTHORIZED only if the effect-owning PEP accepts
   the exact action at the decision time.  When AEC is selected,
   SATISFIED alone MUST NOT trigger reservation or invocation.

5.8.  Accept a Native Authorization Handoff

   A deployment can place the effect-owning PEP in a protocol gateway,
   such as a Model Context Protocol (MCP) gateway that calls an AuthZEN
   PDP, while the effect boundary runs in a separate component that
   holds the provider credential.  A native authorization handoff
   carries the gateway's acceptance of one native permit to that
   boundary.  This section specifies the contents and verification of a
   handoff.  It does not define an encoding: a deployment MUST pin the



Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   encoding, canonicalization, signature algorithm, and signing input it
   accepts.  [EP-NATIVE-HANDOFF] describes one reference encoding.

   A handoff MUST be integrity-protected by the gateway under a key that
   the relying party pins for that gateway, and MUST bind at least:

   *  the gateway identity and the identifier of its signing key;

   *  the native decision, which MUST be a permit;

   *  the native source: the native system and profile labels, the
      issuer, and the native authorization identifier;

   *  the action digest of the full executor action under the pinned
      native operation profile, including any instance field;

   *  the relying party, audience, and executor;

   *  the effecting target identity;

   *  the issuance time and validity window; and

   *  a revocation or status identifier.

   The native authorization identifier MUST be the identifier that the
   native system assigned to the grant when one exists.  When the native
   protocol defines none, as with a stateless decision interface, the
   gateway MUST assign one identifier to each native decision it accepts
   and MUST NOT reuse it for a different decision.  Section 5.10
   explains why such identifiers alone do not prevent a second entry for
   the same action.

   The gateway MUST NOT sign a handoff for an action digest unless its
   enforcement covered every material field of that action, either
   through the native mapping and its operation-binding check or through
   a local check that the gateway performs itself.  A gateway that holds
   a permit covering only a projection of the action MUST NOT attest the
   full action digest on the strength of that permit alone.

   The boundary MUST complete the following checks before it selects a
   status source, performs a lookup, or writes durable state on the
   handoff's behalf, and MUST refuse when any check fails:

   *  the integrity protection verifies under a relying-party-pinned key
      for the named gateway;

   *  the combination of gateway, source labels, and issuer is accepted
      by a relying-party pin;



Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   *  the action digest that the boundary recomputes from its own
      observed action equals the attested digest;

   *  the relying party, audience, executor, and effecting target
      identity equal the pinned values; and

   *  the validity window and maximum age hold against the trusted clock
      and pinned skew.

   The boundary MUST then obtain current status for the revocation
   identifier from a relying-party-configured status source, bound to
   the gateway and the native source, and MUST refuse when that status
   is revoked, stale, unavailable, or unauthenticated.  It MUST derive
   the native replay identity itself, under Section 5.9.  A replay value
   carried in the handoff is a gateway assertion; the boundary MAY check
   it under the encoding's own rules, but MUST NOT use it in place of
   that derivation.

   Immediately before provider entry, the boundary MUST repeat the time
   and status checks.  If they fail, it MUST close the attempt as not
   entered without dispatching it.  Each attempt MUST record the
   identity and digest of the pin set under which its handoff was
   accepted, so that reconciliation after a key or pin rotation
   evaluates the attempt under the pins that admitted it.

   A verified handoff establishes that the pinned gateway attested the
   stated native permit and bindings.  It does not re-verify the native
   artifact, does not show that a native PDP evaluated any input that
   its mapping did not project, and moves the trust basis for the native
   decision from the native issuer to the gateway.  The relying party
   MUST treat compromise of a gateway key as compromise of every native
   source it accepts from that gateway.

5.9.  Derive the Native Replay Identity

   Before consuming or reserving authority, the boundary MUST derive the
   native replay identity of every authorization-bearing native result.
   The native replay identity is the native replay unit of Section 8.5;
   the two terms name one value.












Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   The derivation inputs MUST be exactly the authority namespace of the
   accepted source and the native authorization identifier, combined
   under a relying-party-pinned, domain-separated derivation.  By
   default the authority namespace is the verified issuer value.  When
   the pin declares an authority namespace, the issuer value is not an
   input, so pins that name one issuer in different spellings and
   declare the same namespace yield one native replay identity.
   Section 4 limits which pin sets are acceptable.  A durable store MAY
   further scope the resulting value by relying party.

   The derivation MUST NOT take as input the AEB operation identifier, a
   provider idempotency key, a native system or profile label or other
   wire label, the issuer value when the pin declares an authority
   namespace, a wrapper, handoff, or envelope digest, a consumption
   nonce, a caller-selected retry identifier, or a session, task, trace,
   or challenge identifier.  A wire label can select a pin; the pin, not
   the label, supplies the authority namespace.  The same native
   authority presented in a new wrapper, handoff, task, session, trace,
   challenge, source label, or caller retry MUST yield the same native
   replay identity, so relabelling one grant cannot make it spendable
   twice.

   If the selected native profile cannot provide a stable native
   authorization identifier, the boundary MUST refuse provider entry.

   Native replay identity stops one grant from being spent twice.  It
   does not stop two grants from being spent on one action.  When a
   native path can issue a new identifier for each evaluation of an
   identical request, the same-action fence of Section 5.10 is the
   control that prevents a second provider entry.

5.10.  Hold the Same-Action In-Flight Fence

   The action key of an attempt is the tuple of the relying party, the
   effecting target identity, and the action digest.  It does not
   include the operation identifier, the native authorization
   identifier, the native replay identity, or any wrapper or handoff
   digest.













Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   The boundary compares action digests and effecting target identities
   exactly.  It is not required to recognize two spellings of one
   material value as one value, such as "500" and "500.00", "USD" and
   "usd", a value with and without trailing white space, or two Unicode
   normalization forms of one string.  The native operation profile MUST
   therefore define the canonical form of each material field, and the
   party that constructs the action MUST apply that form before the
   action digest is computed.  Every boundary instance that can reach
   one effecting target MUST be configured with the same effecting
   target identity, because two configured spellings of one provider
   account would give one action two action keys.

   An attempt occupies its action key from the transition that makes it
   CONSUMED or RESERVED, through DISPATCH_PENDING and INVOKED, and while
   it is INDETERMINATE.  An attempt that reaches EXECUTED keeps the
   action key closed for that action instance.

   For every attempt, whatever evidence path admits it, the boundary
   MUST refuse a new attempt whose action key is occupied or closed.
   The evidence path can be a native authorization result, a native
   authorization handoff, a cross-format CAID join, or an AEC
   composition.  The refusal MUST occur before provider entry, and the
   refused attempt MUST NOT consume its authority.  For an attempt
   admitted through a native authorization result, including one
   received as a native authorization handoff, the boundary MUST report
   the reason as native_action_in_flight while the action key is
   occupied, and MAY report native_action_already_executed once EXECUTED
   has closed it.  On other evidence paths it MUST report a reason that
   identifies an occupied or closed action key.  This holds even when
   the new attempt carries a fresh native permit, a different native
   authorization identifier, a new handoff, new evidence, or a new
   operation identifier.

   The fence MUST be recorded in the same durable state domain as
   consumption and reservation.  Occupying the action key MUST be an
   atomic write that detects conflicts, so that concurrent attempts
   cannot both occupy it, and it is part of the transition in
   Section 5.11.  Process memory is not sufficient: the fence MUST
   survive restart and MUST be shared by every boundary instance that
   can reach the effecting target.

   The fence releases only when:

   1.  authenticated evidence establishes that the attempt reached
       FAILED;

   2.  authenticated reconciliation resolves an INDETERMINATE attempt to
       FAILED;



Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   3.  the boundary itself stopped the attempt before provider entry,
       because a write of the transition in Section 5.11 failed or
       conflicted or because a check made before entry failed, and it
       confirmed through an authenticated durable read that the attempt
       was never dispatched (its record never reached DISPATCH_PENDING,
       or the boundary closed it as not entered under Section 5.8
       through an atomic transition that no dispatch of the attempt can
       follow and that recorded the not-entered marker defined below)
       and that each write it made for the attempt was released; or

   4.  authorized pre-entry recovery, specified below, proves that the
       attempt was a pre-entry stop.

   Reconciliation to EXECUTED keeps the action key closed.  A timeout,
   local exception, elapsed time, caller retry, fresh native authority,
   new handoff, or unauthenticated report MUST NOT release the fence.
   After a release, a new attempt for the same action instance still
   requires native authority whose native replay identity has not been
   consumed, a new operation identifier, and the complete lifecycle.

   Every transition that closes an attempt as not entered, whether the
   boundary makes it for its own pre-entry stop or pre-entry recovery
   makes it, MUST record an explicit not-entered marker bound to that
   attempt in the same atomic write.  Only that marker, or an
   authenticated durable read showing that the record is still in a
   state before DISPATCH_PENDING, shows that an attempt did not enter
   the provider.  The absence of evidence is never such proof.  A record
   that is closed or released but carries neither the not-entered marker
   nor terminal provider evidence, including a record read from a store
   that does not return the evidence stored with it, MUST be treated as
   INDETERMINATE: the boundary MUST NOT treat it as a pre-entry stop and
   MUST NOT release anything on its basis.

   An attempt can stop before provider entry without meeting item 3.
   The boundary can crash while the attempt is CONSUMED or RESERVED,
   lose the acknowledgement of the write that enters DISPATCH_PENDING,
   or fail to confirm a release after a pre-entry refusal.  Such an
   attempt keeps the action key occupied and its reservations held.  The
   boundary MUST provide a pre-entry recovery operation for it.  A
   boundary that crashes after occupying the action key but before
   recording the attempt leaves records that no attempt record accounts
   for.  They cannot be shown not entered, as the next paragraph
   explains, so they stay held; a boundary SHOULD record the attempt
   before it occupies the action key, so that this case cannot arise.
   Pre-entry recovery is distinct from the reconciliation of
   Section 5.14: one invocation either releases the attempt as not
   entered or leaves every record held, and it MUST NOT continue into
   reconciliation to EXECUTED or FAILED.  The operation MUST require



Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 22]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   recovery authorization from the relying party that is bound to
   exactly one attempt, as Section 5.14 specifies, including that
   attempt's operation identifier and action key.

   The operation MAY release the action key and the attempt's
   reservations only when an authenticated durable read shows that the
   attempt record never reached DISPATCH_PENDING, that the boundary
   closed it as not entered through an atomic transition that no
   dispatch of the attempt can follow and that recorded the not-entered
   marker, and, where the effecting system offers an authenticated
   lookup by operation or idempotency key, that lookup reports that the
   operation was not received.  The absence of an attempt record is not
   such proof, because a live attempt may not yet have written it; a
   record held without an attempt record therefore stays held.  When the
   record is still in a state from which the original attempt could
   proceed to dispatch, the recovery operation MUST first close it as
   not entered through such an atomic transition, so that the original
   attempt cannot dispatch after the release.

   That transition is the linearization point between recovery and the
   original attempt.  Recovery MAY treat the attempt as not entered only
   if its own transition succeeded, as shown by an authenticated durable
   read where the store provides one and otherwise by the affirmative
   result that Section 5.11 defines.  Once that transition has
   succeeded, the original attempt's own transition toward
   DISPATCH_PENDING MUST fail, and the original attempt MUST NOT
   dispatch.  It MUST NOT use the records it writes afterwards, and it
   releases them only after it confirms that the attempt was closed as
   not entered; until then they stay held.  If recovery's transition
   fails because the record has reached DISPATCH_PENDING or a later
   state, recovery MUST treat the attempt as INDETERMINATE and MUST
   release nothing.  A lookup result obtained for that recovery
   describes a moment before dispatch, so it MUST NOT be used as
   evidence of the attempt's outcome: an attempt that reached
   DISPATCH_PENDING is resolved only by reconciliation under
   Section 5.14, with evidence obtained after dispatch could have begun.

   Without the proof described above, the action key and the
   reservations MUST stay held and the attempt MUST be treated as
   INDETERMINATE.  Recovery MUST release the attempt's records only
   after its not-entered transition has succeeded and been confirmed, as
   Section 5.11 requires for every release.  Recovery MUST NOT release,
   close, or commit a record held by a different attempt, and a pre-
   entry stop MUST NOT be reconciled to EXECUTED or FAILED.

   Without an instance field, identical material actions are one action
   instance, and a further identical action after EXECUTED is refused.
   A native operation profile that must admit intentionally repeated



Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 23]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   identical actions MAY declare an instance field.  The instance field
   MUST be a material field, so it is part of the action digest and is
   covered by the native authorization or by the handoff's action
   digest.  Its value SHOULD be fixed by the party that authorizes the
   action rather than chosen by the party that retries it (see
   Section 10).

5.11.  Atomically Consume or Reserve Before Invocation

   After AUTHORIZED and native replay identity derivation, and before
   provider entry, the boundary MUST perform the durable state
   transition required by the native evidence and local policy.  This
   can include consuming a one-time authorization, challenge nonce, or
   operation key; reserving a bounded capability or budget; and fencing
   the operation to one owner across replicas.

   Each write in the transition MUST be atomic within the relying
   party's durable state domain.  Before provider entry, the boundary
   MUST check and occupy the same-action fence of Section 5.10, consume
   or reserve every one-time native replay identity, and record the
   operation.  It MAY do so in one atomic step or in several atomic
   writes.  With several writes, provider entry MUST wait until every
   write has succeeded.  If any write conflicts or fails, the boundary
   MUST refuse without provider entry and MUST NOT consume the native
   authority of the refused attempt.  It MUST confirm the release of
   each write it made through an authenticated durable read, and
   otherwise MUST leave that write held.  A refusal whose writes are not
   all confirmed released MUST NOT be reported as a final refusal; the
   boundary reports the result as INDETERMINATE until the release is
   confirmed.  The boundary MUST release or close only records that it
   wrote for the current attempt and MUST be able to prove that
   ownership, for example through an ownership token created for the
   attempt.  A record that carries the same operation identifier, native
   replay identity, or action key but was written by another attempt
   MUST NOT be released or closed on this attempt's behalf; operation
   identifiers can be chosen by the caller, so an identifier match alone
   does not prove ownership.  A record that successive attempts can
   hold, such as a reservation keyed by an evaluation, a wrapper, or a
   native replay identity rather than by the attempt, MUST be released,
   closed, or committed on an attempt's behalf only when the boundary
   can prove that the attempt is that record's current owner, for
   example through a durable record keyed by the attempt that marks it
   as the owner, or because the attempt itself created the record and
   has not handed it back.  The operation record MUST bind the native
   replay identity and the action key to the executor-owned observed
   action and operation identifier, never a presenter-selected decoy.
   Independently of that composite operation record, the store MUST
   enforce uniqueness or conflict detection for every native replay



Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 24]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   identity that the selected profile marks as one-time and for every
   occupied or closed action key.  Changing an operation identifier MUST
   NOT make the same one-time native authority reservable again, and
   presenting fresh native authority MUST NOT make an occupied or closed
   action key reservable again.

   If the store is unavailable, non-atomic, or stale, or reports an
   ambiguous result, the boundary MUST refuse before invocation.  An
   atomic transition or conditional write succeeds only when the store
   returns the affirmative result that its interface defines for
   success.  Any other answer, including an error, a timeout, a refusal,
   or a value that is merely not a refusal, is a failure whose effect on
   stored state is unknown.  When the outcome of a write is unknown, the
   boundary MUST NOT invoke, and MUST resolve the stored state through
   an authenticated durable read before it releases or reuses any key
   the write may have recorded.  It MUST NOT release a record that it
   cannot prove it wrote; such a record stays held until that read or
   the recovery of Section 5.10 resolves it.

   When an attempt record exists, the boundary MUST release, close, or
   commit the attempt's occupation of the action key and its other
   reservations only after the attempt record's transition to a terminal
   state, or to not entered, has succeeded and been confirmed, through
   an authenticated durable read where the store provides one and
   otherwise by the affirmative result of the transition.  It MUST NOT
   release them before that transition or regardless of its result.  If
   the transition fails or cannot be confirmed, those records MUST stay
   held.

   AEB does not claim atomicity between a local store and an unrelated
   remote provider.  It requires the local consume or reserve transition
   to occur first so that any uncertainty after dispatch cannot make the
   same authority, or the same action, available for an uncontrolled
   second effect.

5.12.  Enter the Provider with the Frozen Effect

   An authorized MCP tool call, API request, or other protocol operation
   is not automatically proof that an underlying provider effect was
   authorized or occurred.  When the authorized operation is itself the
   protected provider mutation, the same frozen action can continue
   through this lifecycle.  When an MCP server, API service, or
   intermediary makes a distinct downstream provider request, the
   boundary MUST bind that provider request to the authorized operation
   under the selected native profile or a pinned cross-format mapping.
   It MUST NOT infer that binding from a session, trace, tool name, or
   natural-language description.




Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 25]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   Before any call, message, or byte can reach an effecting component,
   the boundary MUST durably enter DISPATCH_PENDING for the frozen
   observed action that reached AUTHORIZED and CONSUMED or RESERVED.
   The record MUST bind the action digest, action key, operation
   identifier, native replay identity, provider environment, audience,
   reservation or consumption record, and adapter.  Failure or ambiguity
   while writing this record MUST withhold dispatch.  When the result of
   that write is not affirmative, the boundary MUST NOT release any
   record on that basis.  It MUST read the attempt record: if the record
   reached DISPATCH_PENDING for this attempt, the boundary either
   dispatches as the proven owner of that record or treats the attempt
   as INDETERMINATE; if the record is still in its earlier state, the
   boundary MUST close it as not entered through the atomic transition
   of Section 5.10 before it releases anything.  If the record cannot be
   read, the boundary MAY attempt that not-entered transition directly
   and release only on its affirmative result; otherwise every record
   stays held and the attempt is treated as INDETERMINATE.

   A boundary that has sent a write that could record an attempt as not
   entered, including a write whose result it did not receive, MUST NOT
   dispatch that attempt afterwards, whatever a later read of the record
   shows.  Such a write can still take effect after that read, and the
   record would then show an attempt that entered as not entered, so
   that pre-entry recovery would release its authority.  A boundary that
   cannot read the record after a non-affirmative result of the write
   that enters DISPATCH_PENDING therefore either sends no not-entered
   transition, keeps every record held, and dispatches only if a later
   authenticated read shows DISPATCH_PENDING for the attempt, or
   attempts the not-entered transition and then never dispatches the
   attempt.  An attempt left in DISPATCH_PENDING without a dispatch is
   INDETERMINATE even though nothing was dispatched: it is closed only
   by reconciliation with terminal evidence under Section 5.13 that
   forecloses any execution, now or later, under the attempt's provider
   idempotency key, for example an authenticated cancellation of that
   key by the effecting system, and whether presented evidence
   establishes that is the verifier's decision.  Without such evidence
   its records stay held.  A point-in-time absence of the operation,
   even when authenticated, does not foreclose execution: a live
   dispatcher can still deliver its call afterwards.

   The boundary MUST invoke only from that durable state.  Where the
   provider supports an idempotency key, the boundary MUST send one
   derived from the native replay identity; the derivation MAY also bind
   the effecting target identity and action digest.  It MUST NOT be
   derived from the operation identifier, a wrapper or handoff digest,
   or a source label.  After dispatch begins, the boundary MUST durably
   record INVOKED or a terminal outcome before reporting success to the
   requester.



Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 26]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   The adapter MUST receive only the authority and evidence necessary
   for the downstream interface.  It MUST NOT accept mutable
   intermediary or caller context that changes a material field after
   the boundary's authorization decision.

5.13.  Classify the Effect Outcome

   After invocation begins, the boundary MUST classify the result as
   EXECUTED, FAILED, or INDETERMINATE.  On restart, a DISPATCH_PENDING
   operation without an authoritative terminal record MUST be promoted
   to INDETERMINATE before any retry or release, because the process
   cannot establish that dispatch did not begin.

   *  EXECUTED requires an authoritative response or accepted native
      execution evidence matched to the exact action, operation
      identifier, provider environment, and audience.

   *  FAILED requires authoritative evidence that the invoked operation
      did not cause the protected effect.  A local parse error,
      exception, timeout, connection loss, process crash, or missing
      response is not by itself such evidence.

   *  INDETERMINATE is REQUIRED whenever invocation may have reached the
      effecting system but the available authoritative evidence does not
      establish EXECUTED or FAILED.

   A terminal outcome that commits or releases records of an attempt
   that reached DISPATCH_PENDING, whether the dispatch returns it or
   reconciliation presents it, MUST be accepted only after a relying-
   party-configured verifier authenticates the provider evidence and
   binds it to that attempt, including its operation identifier, native
   replay identity, and provider idempotency key.  The boundary MUST
   tell the verifier the purpose of each check, a terminal outcome or a
   pre-entry lookup, and MUST count a verifier result only when it
   affirms the purpose it evaluated and the attempt it evaluated it for;
   a result that merely does not refuse is not an affirmation.  A lookup
   reporting that the operation was not received is evidence only for
   the pre-entry recovery of Section 5.10.  It MUST NOT be accepted as
   FAILED for an attempt that reached DISPATCH_PENDING, because a
   dispatch in flight can still arrive after the lookup; such an attempt
   needs terminal evidence, for example an authenticated cancellation of
   its idempotency key by the effecting system.  A boundary that has no
   such verifier MUST NOT move an attempt that reached DISPATCH_PENDING
   to EXECUTED or FAILED, and the attempt stays INDETERMINATE.

   This applies to every boundary, whatever evidence path admitted the
   attempt, including a boundary that admits attempts through a CAID
   join or an AEC composition, and it applies to the result that the



Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 27]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   dispatch itself returns.  A provider adapter's classification of that
   result is not verification: a timeout or an error that an adapter
   reports as FAILED MUST NOT release the action key unless the verifier
   affirms it as a terminal outcome for the attempt.

   Evidence presented to reconciliation or to pre-entry recovery MUST
   carry a kind in the boundary's own input that states whether it is a
   terminal outcome or a pre-entry lookup.  Reconciliation MUST refuse
   evidence of the pre-entry lookup kind, and pre-entry recovery MUST
   refuse evidence of the terminal outcome kind, before either passes
   the evidence to the verifier.  The party that presents evidence MUST
   present it under the kind that it is, and a verifier MUST refuse a
   lookup reporting that the operation was not received when it is asked
   to verify a terminal outcome.  The boundary cannot check either
   obligation (see Section 10).

   For EXECUTED, the boundary MUST commit any reserved spend, preserve
   the terminal evidence, and keep the action key closed.  For FAILED,
   it MUST preserve the failure evidence and follow the native
   reservation policy; the same-action fence then releases under
   Section 5.10.  For INDETERMINATE, it MUST preserve or consume the
   reservation, keep the native replay identity consumed and the action
   key occupied, refuse reuse of the operation identifier, and prohibit
   a blind replay.

5.14.  Perform Authenticated Reconciliation

   An INDETERMINATE operation, including one recovered from a stranded
   DISPATCH_PENDING record, MUST remain closed until reconciliation
   authenticates the provider or system of record and matches the result
   to the original action, operation identifier, provider environment,
   audience, target resource, and every application-specific material
   field.

   Reconciliation MAY move INDETERMINATE to EXECUTED when authoritative
   evidence establishes that the exact effect occurred.  It MAY move
   INDETERMINATE to FAILED when authoritative evidence establishes that
   it did not occur.  That evidence is verified for the attempt and for
   the purpose of a terminal outcome as Section 5.13 requires; a pre-
   entry lookup is not such evidence.  Missing, stale, conflicting,
   unauthenticated, or action-mismatched observations MUST leave the
   operation INDETERMINATE.

   A reconciliation result MUST be bound to the attempt it resolves,
   including that attempt's operation identifier and native replay
   identity.  It MUST NOT commit, close, or release a different attempt
   that holds the same action key.  A pre-entry stop MUST NOT be
   reconciled to EXECUTED or FAILED; Section 5.10 defines its recovery.



Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 28]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   Recovery authorization MUST be bound to exactly one attempt,
   identified by an attempt identifier that no other attempt uses.  It
   MUST NOT be bound only to an operation identifier, an operation key,
   an action key, an evaluation, or another value that several attempts
   can share, because such a credential would authorize claims across
   attempts.  The attempt identity MUST be unique across every boundary
   that shares the durable state domain, and it MUST be scoped to the
   boundary.  It MUST include an identifier of the boundary that differs
   between boundaries sharing that domain and is the same for every
   instance of one boundary, and, where boundaries of different kinds
   share one store, it MUST also include a component that distinguishes
   them.  Both MUST enter the derivation of every record keyed by the
   attempt, including the records that a claim may cover, and the scope
   against which the authorization is checked, so that two boundaries,
   of the same kind or of different kinds, cannot name each other's
   records even when they assign the same attempt identifier.  The
   boundary identifier MUST NOT enter the action key, which every
   boundary that can reach one effecting target shares.  A boundary or
   store MUST refuse a recovery claim that does not name the attempt it
   is made for, before it evaluates the authorization.  Before a
   boundary or store claims, releases, closes, or commits a record under
   recovery authorization, it MUST verify that the record is one of the
   records derived from the attempt the authorization names, and MUST
   refuse any other record.  One recovery authorization bound to the
   attempt MUST suffice for the boundary to claim and close every record
   that the attempt holds, including its occupation of the action key,
   so that reconciliation or recovery of one attempt completes in one
   operation.  A boundary MUST NOT require a separately bound credential
   for a record that it derives from the attempt's own records.

   Reconciliation MUST record the attempt's terminal state, and confirm
   it, before it releases, closes, or commits any of the attempt's
   reservations or its occupation of the action key (Section 5.11).  An
   attempt record that is still in DISPATCH_PENDING or a later non-
   terminal state MUST first be moved to INDETERMINATE through an atomic
   transition, so that the original attempt can no longer record its own
   outcome concurrently.

   Reconciliation MUST NOT resurrect the original authorization or
   silently release its native replay identity.  Reconciliation to
   FAILED releases the same-action fence; reconciliation to EXECUTED
   keeps it closed.  If policy permits a later attempt after an
   authoritative FAILED result, that attempt MUST carry native authority
   whose native replay identity has not been consumed, use a new
   operation identifier, and complete the lifecycle required by local
   policy.  An implementation MUST NOT invoke again merely because a
   timeout elapsed, because the caller retried, or because fresh native
   authority was presented for the same action instance.



Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 29]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


6.  Declaration and Challenge Semantics

   A deployment MAY publish a static declaration describing protected
   actions, material fields, evidence requirements, challenge methods,
   and effect-boundary placement.  Such a declaration is discovery
   metadata.  It MUST NOT override the relying party's live, local
   enforcement configuration.  An unsupported declaration version MUST
   be ignored as discovery input; it cannot weaken or replace live
   enforcement.  An action that the live boundary configuration cannot
   classify or process under a supported version MUST fail closed.

   When required evidence is absent or unacceptable, a boundary MAY use
   its application protocol to return a dynamic challenge.  A challenge
   MUST identify the boundary-computed action, the missing evidence
   roles, the policy context, an intended audience, a short expiry, and
   a single-use unpredictable nonce or equivalent replay unit.  The
   nonce MUST NOT be consumed merely because untrusted bytes parse.  It
   MUST be consumed atomically only after the selected native verifier
   establishes the integrity and challenge binding of an in-window
   presentation, and before that presentation can reach SATISFIED or
   authorize an effect.  A presentation that is malformed,
   unauthenticated, expired, or not bound to the challenge MUST be
   refused without burning the nonce.  A natively verified, challenge-
   bound presentation consumes the nonce whether or not the remaining
   evidence satisfies the requirement.  Follow-up challenges MUST remain
   bound to the original boundary-computed action and MUST NOT derive
   that action from presenter input.

   A declaration or challenge authorizes nothing, reserves nothing, and
   promises no execution.  A satisfied challenge still proceeds through
   native verification, exact-action correspondence, AUTHORIZED, native
   replay identity, the same-action fence, and atomic consumption or
   reservation.  MATCH and SATISFIED also apply when the relying party
   selects CAID and AEC.  This document intentionally defines no new
   manifest object, challenge object, well-known URI, HTTP status code,
   or media type.

7.  Native Evidence and Transport Boundaries

7.1.  WIMSE and HTTP Message Signatures

   Workload Identity in Multi-System Environments (WIMSE) workload
   credentials and the WIMSE HTTP Message Signatures profile
   [WIMSE-HTTP] can provide end-to-end workload authentication and
   message integrity for the request components covered by the validated
   signature, including a body protected by a validated content digest.
   HTTP Message Signatures [RFC9421] provide the underlying component-
   signing mechanism.



Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 30]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   AEB consumes those results; it does not redefine them.  A validated
   WIMSE request can establish which workload possessed the protected
   key and that covered message components were not modified
   undetectably.  It does not by itself establish CAID MATCH, AEC
   SATISFIED, named-human authorization, local AUTHORIZED, one-time
   consumption, or execution.

   The WIMSE AI Identity Management System (AIMS) document [WIMSE-AIMS]
   describes how existing standards, including the WIMSE architecture
   and the OAuth 2.0 family of specifications, can be applied to AI
   agent authentication and authorization.  The individual draft-munoz-
   wimse-authorization-evidence submission [MUNOZ-WIMSE-EVIDENCE]
   describes an adjacent signed-evidence composition.  AEB begins after
   the selected native identity and authorization path has produced the
   inputs enforced at the effect boundary.  It does not replace their
   issuance, verification, mapping, or authorization semantics.

   PEDIGREE [PEDIGREE] describes native identity and delegation-chain
   evidence.  The AEB result records whether the relying party's stated
   delegation requirement was satisfied by the mapped evidence.  It does
   not reinterpret, re-derive, or override the delegation protocol's
   native decision.  In particular, a PEDIGREE completion block is post-
   effect evidence and MUST NOT fill a pre-action authorization role.

   Headers, routing metadata, forwarded identity, trace context, or
   other values that an intermediary can add, remove, or mutate outside
   the validated end-to-end integrity coverage MUST NOT be load-bearing
   authorization evidence.  They MAY be used for routing or diagnostics.
   If such a value affects the protected consequence, the boundary MUST
   derive it independently or require it to be covered by accepted
   native integrity and the observed action's material binding.

7.2.  AuthZEN and COAZ

   The AuthZEN Authorization API [AUTHZEN-API] defines the PDP request
   and decision interface.  COAZ [AUTHZEN-COAZ] defines how an incoming
   protocol operation is projected into the AuthZEN subject, action,
   resource, and context (SARC) model.  COAZ-MCP [AUTHZEN-COAZ-MCP]
   applies that mapping to MCP operations.  Those specifications remain
   authoritative for operation-to-SARC mapping, PDP evaluation, and PEP
   enforcement.

   An AuthZEN decision applies to the request that the selected mapping
   constructs.  COAZ-MCP notes, under "Authorization Granularity and
   Omitted Inputs", that two messages differing only in an input the
   mapping does not project can receive the same decision, and it
   forbids a PEP from representing a permit as evidence that the PDP
   evaluated an omitted input.  Its PEP behavior also requires the PEP



Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 31]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   to check, before applying a permit, that the method, selected
   mapping, and input-variable values are unchanged from the evaluated
   message.  A permit therefore covers only the inputs that the pinned
   mapping projects.

   The effect-owning PEP can record AUTHORIZED for the full executor
   action only when every material field of that action is either
   projected by the pinned COAZ mapping and covered by that operation-
   binding check, or enforced by a separate relying-party-pinned check
   (Section 5.3).  Otherwise exact-action correspondence is
   INDETERMINATE and the boundary MUST refuse.  When the effect boundary
   is not that PEP, the binding of the full executor action comes from
   the PEP's native authorization handoff over the full action digest
   (Section 5.8), not from the permit alone.

   An AuthZEN decision consists of a boolean decision and an optional
   context object.  The Authorization API allows, but does not require,
   a PDP to sign its response, and it defines no decision identifier and
   no one-time-use property; its optional request identifier is
   generated by the PEP.  A new evaluation of an identical request can
   therefore produce a new permit.  On an AuthZEN path, the native
   authorization identifier is the one the accepting PEP or gateway
   assigns, and the same-action fence of Section 5.10 is what prevents a
   second provider entry for an action whose first attempt is
   INDETERMINATE.

   AEB does not replace COAZ mapping with CAID and does not require a
   second PDP.  CAID is needed only if the boundary must compare the
   authorized operation with an independently encoded provider action.
   AEC is needed only if local policy adds multiple evidence roles
   beyond the native decision.

7.3.  Attested Per-Action Tokens and Permit Records

   OAuth access tokens, Rich Authorization Requests, Transaction Tokens,
   and related artifacts remain native OAuth inputs.  OAuth
   authorization servers retain their OAuth roles; a Transaction Token
   Service retains Transaction Token issuance; and each accepting
   workload or resource retains its native authorization and enforcement
   decision.  Their token, proof-of-possession, audience, and
   transaction semantics are not redefined by AEB.  AEB applies only the
   downstream custody and provider-effect lifecycle selected by the
   effect-owning relying party.








Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 32]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   AP2 mandates [AP2] likewise retain AP2's native verification,
   checkout, transaction-linkage, issuer, holder, and payment semantics.
   An AEB implementation can consume an AP2 result and control one
   covered provider entry without converting the mandate into an AEB
   token or claiming AP2 interoperability.

   Attested per-action tokens, including artifacts described by a
   deployment as OASNT-like, remain native evidence formats.  AEB does
   not assign that descriptive label a token type, claim set, registry
   entry, or trust meaning.  The selected native verifier determines
   what the token proves and exposes its integrity-protected action
   commitment, issuer, audience, validity, freshness, status, and
   bounded result to the AEB adapter.

   Supply Chain Integrity, Transparency, and Trust (SCITT) Permit
   records defined by [MUNOZ-PERMIT] likewise remain native pre-
   execution decision evidence.  AEB does not reserialize a Permit or
   convert it into an AEB receipt.  It verifies the selected Permit
   revision through its native adapter.  When the Permit's protected
   action commitment binds the exact executor operation, that native
   binding establishes exact-action correspondence.  When the Permit and
   the executor action are independently encoded, the boundary maps the
   Permit's protected material action through a pinned CAID profile.
   The Permit fills an evidence role only when the relying party selects
   an AEC requirement that admits it for that role.

   A native format's valid signature proves only the statement and
   signer semantics that format defines.  It does not, without an
   additional accepted profile and evidence, prove that a natural person
   operated the workload, understood the action, held authority, or
   performed a particular approval ceremony.

8.  Native Compilation Contract

   An AEB adapter compiles the result of a native verifier into the
   inputs needed by the AEB processing model.  The native artifact,
   verifier, trust model, and result remain authoritative for their own
   semantics.  Compilation MUST NOT convert a native result into an AEB
   credential or permit, and an AEB result MUST NOT overwrite a native
   result.

   The compilation target is the ordered AEB decision and lifecycle
   vocabulary: native verification, exact-action correspondence,
   authorization, native replay identity, the same-action fence, atomic
   reservation or consumption, provider entry, outcome classification,
   and authenticated reconciliation.  CAID matching and AEC satisfaction
   are included only when the relying party selects the corresponding
   cross-format or multi-leg stage.  A successful compile establishes



Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 33]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   only that the native result can be evaluated at those interfaces.  It
   does not establish that the action is authorized, executed, safe,
   lawful, or true.

8.1.  Pinned Inputs

   Before compilation, the relying party MUST pin:

   *  the native protocol, document revision, media type, schema
      version, and verifier revision;

   *  the adapter identifier, adapter revision, verifier implementation
      identifier, and implementation digest;

   *  the native trust anchors, issuer and audience policy, clock,
      freshness rules, and required status sources;

   *  the native operation profile, including its material-field
      inventory, any instance field, and effecting target identity;

   *  when a cross-format join is selected, the exact source descriptor,
      target CAID action type, mapping profile identifier, mapping
      revision, and mapping digest;

   *  when AEC is selected, the accepted evidence role or roles;

   *  the authority namespace, the native replay identity derivation of
      Section 5.9, and the replay scope; and

   *  every native field whose omission or change can affect the
      protected consequence, evidence role, freshness, replay unit, or
      local policy.

   Presented data MAY select among already pinned native variants only
   where the native protocol defines that selection and the relying
   party enables it.  Presented data MUST NOT add or change a trust
   root, verifier, mapping, evidence role, material-field rule,
   authority namespace, or replay scope.

   A verifier implementation identifier and digest are relying-party-
   selected configuration metadata.  They do not prove that a measured
   runtime loaded or executed those bytes.  A compile result MUST keep
   runtime measurement unestablished unless a separate accepted native
   attestation proves it.







Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 34]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


8.2.  Deterministic Operations

   An adapter exposes verifyNative, which verifies the artifact under
   the pinned native rules and returns the integrity-protected native
   result and exact operation binding.  When the boundary performs a
   cross-format join, the adapter also exposes the logically separate
   mapAction operation, which maps only a VERIFIED native result to the
   relying party's expected action under the pinned mapping profile.

   Each selected operation MUST be deterministic for the supplied bytes
   and pins.  It MUST NOT perform a network request, consult ambient
   credentials or trust stores, read mutable global state, or accept a
   caller-supplied verification verdict.  Required current status and
   time MUST be explicit relying-party inputs.

   The boundary MUST supply detached, recursively immutable copies of
   the native artifact, expected action, trust inputs, status inputs,
   adapter configuration, and mapping profile.  An adapter MUST NOT
   change a pinned input between native verification and action mapping.

8.3.  Closed Compile Result

   For each native artifact, the compiler MUST return a closed result
   that contains:

   *  the native protocol, exact revision, artifact digest, and native
      verification result;

   *  the adapter identifier, revision, and configuration digest, plus
      the pinned verifier implementation identifier, revision, and
      digest;

   *  when selected, the mapping profile identifier, revision, and
      digest, plus mapper and resolver identifiers and the resolver
      implementation digest;

   *  the source schema or media type and target action type;

   *  the exact relying-party-supplied expected material action value,
      digest, and input provenance;

   *  the CAID and normalized-action digest when a cross-format join is
      selected, or the exact native operation binding otherwise;

   *  when AEC is selected, the accepted evidence role and subject, plus
      the status input and derived freshness result under pinned adapter
      rules;




Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 35]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   *  the native replay identity, its authority namespace, and the
      replay scope;

   *  whether verifier runtime measurement is established;

   *  the semantic-loss report defined below; and

   *  every compiler state that remains unsupported or indeterminate.

   The compile result is typed verifier output.  It is not a bearer
   token, permit, receipt, or proof of execution.  A deployment MAY
   serialize it for diagnostics or evidence transport, but that
   serialization MUST NOT become reusable authority.

   A native profile MAY expose actor, acting-for principal, target,
   declared purpose, audience, constraints, validity, or native
   nonclaims only when its native verifier and pinned mapping establish
   those values.  The generic compiler MUST NOT infer them from a
   subject identifier, policy decision, action label, natural-language
   field, or trace metadata merely to fill a common shape.

   A caller-supplied local-policy decision MAY be reported as an
   explicit input, but it MUST NOT establish local authorization.
   Authorization, reservation or consumption, provider entry, outcome,
   and reconciliation remain unestablished until the component that owns
   each transition evaluates and records it.

8.4.  Semantic-Loss Report

   The adapter MUST enumerate every field exposed by the native verifier
   that the selected mapping does not carry into the target action or
   accepted evidence role.  Each omission MUST be classified as
   material, non-material, or unknown under relying-party-pinned rules,
   with a stable field path and declared basis.  When no cross-format
   join is selected, the same classification applies to the native
   projection: every material field of the observed action that the
   native decision request does not project, and that no relying-party-
   pinned local check enforces, is an omitted material field.

   An omitted material or unknown field makes exact-action matching
   INDETERMINATE.  That leg MUST NOT report equivalence, MATCH,
   SATISFIED, or AUTHORIZED.  Renaming, moving, defaulting, unit-
   converting, rounding, truncating, or combining a material field is a
   transformation and requires a pinned deterministic rule.  Natural-
   language similarity, an agent assertion, or a shared trace identifier
   is not such a rule.





Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 36]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   The compiler MAY retain a native mapper's raw relation, CAID, and
   normalized-action digest for diagnostics, but MUST label them as raw
   native output.  They MUST NOT appear as the compiler-effective
   relation after material or unknown loss.  The effective CAID and
   normalized- action digest are absent in that case.

   If two compiled legs produce one CAID but different normalized-
   action digests, the boundary MUST refuse the join.  CAID remains a
   typed content identifier.  It is not an authorization claim or a
   general declaration that two source formats have identical semantics.

8.5.  Stable Native Replay Unit

   Every accepted authorization-bearing native result MUST expose a
   native replay unit.  The native replay unit is the native replay
   identity of Section 5.9 and MUST be derived as specified there, from
   the authority namespace and the native authorization identifier only.
   It MUST NOT include an AEB wrapper digest, AEB operation identifier,
   consumption nonce, caller retry identifier, native system or profile
   label, or other value whose change would make the same native
   authority spendable again.

   The evaluator MUST probe the adapter with a second deterministic
   wrapper reference.  Where the relying party accepts one issuer under
   more than one source label within one authority namespace, the
   evaluator MUST also probe the adapter with the same native authority
   under a second accepted label, and, where pins declare a shared
   authority namespace for two spellings of one issuer, under the second
   spelling.  If the replay unit changes while the verified native
   authority does not, the result is INDETERMINATE.  If two distinct
   verified native artifacts from one adapter collapse onto one replay
   unit without the native profile defining that equivalence, the result
   is INDETERMINATE.  A replay-unit value does not prove that
   reservation or consumption occurred.

8.6.  Path and Provider Ownership

   A deployment MUST state whether the AEB boundary controls the
   credential or other capability that reaches the effecting provider,
   which provider-entry paths it mediates, and every direct,
   administrator, break-glass, alternate-protocol, queued, or system-of-
   record path that bypasses it.  An observe-only adapter or an adapter
   placed beside a write path MUST NOT be described as consequence
   admission or complete mediation.

   The compile result MAY record provider-attempt and reconciliation
   bindings only after the corresponding AEB transitions occur.  A
   policy allow, access token, message signature, transparency receipt,



Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 37]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   action record, audit record, or native permit MUST NOT be relabeled
   as proof that provider entry, commitment, or an external effect
   occurred.

8.7.  Compilation Conformance

   A native compilation profile MUST publish exact source locks, at
   least one positive vector containing the original native bytes, and a
   condition-removed control for every negative vector.  Reports MUST
   keep native verification, mapping, AEC, local policy, reservation,
   provider outcome, and reconciliation results separate.

   The profile MUST include hostile vectors for material-field omission
   and substitution, mapping-pin change, stale or unavailable status,
   wrapper replay, alternate-path bypass, refusal-time consumption,
   concurrent admission, timeout after provider entry, blind retry,
   reconciliation binding mismatch, fresh native authority for the same
   action instance while an earlier attempt is INDETERMINATE, the same
   native authority under a second accepted source label, a pin set
   whose differently spelled issuer values normalize equal without a
   shared authority namespace, a pre-entry stop with and without proof
   that it never entered the provider, a pre-entry recovery that loses
   its not-entered transition to an original attempt that reaches
   DISPATCH_PENDING first, a lost acknowledgement of the write that
   enters DISPATCH_PENDING, a store answer that is neither the
   affirmative result nor a refusal, a failed reservation write while
   another attempt holds a record with the same operation identifier,
   recovery of one attempt while a later attempt holds a record that
   both can hold in turn, a recovery authorization for one attempt
   presented for another attempt's record, one issuer value pinned under
   two different declared authority namespaces, and a native decision
   request that omits a material field.  A profile that accepts native
   authorization handoffs MUST also include a handoff whose attested
   action digest differs from the observed action.  The profile MUST
   state every native semantic that could not be compiled without
   invention.

   A profile that claims a direct native authorization path MUST show
   the exact native operation binding, the native replay identity, and
   the same-action fence without inserting a second PDP.  A profile that
   joins a separately encoded provider action MUST exercise the selected
   CAID mapping, including a material-field substitution.  A profile
   that adds multiple evidence roles MUST exercise the selected AEC
   requirement.  Each report MUST say which conditional stages were used
   and why.






Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 38]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   A generic AEB compiler conformance claim requires at least two
   materially unrelated native profiles to reach the same AEB lifecycle
   without changing their native wire formats or result semantics.  A
   same-team runner is reference evidence, not an independent
   implementation.  Matching a finite vector set does not establish
   complete mediation, production deployment, or provider truth.

9.  Conformance and Deployment Claims

   An implementation conforms to AEB only if every protected invocation
   follows the ordered processing model in Section 5 and fails closed on
   every missing or ambiguous required transition.  A deployment MUST
   state whether CAID or AEC is selected and MUST document:

   *  the protected action types and the effect paths actually mediated;

   *  the trusted configuration and durable-state boundaries;

   *  the native verifier revisions and relying-party pins;

   *  the native operation profile, material-field inventory, any
      instance field, and effecting target identity for each protected
      action type, and the method used to derive material action fields
      at the boundary;

   *  the authority namespace pinned for each accepted native source;

   *  when native authorization handoffs are accepted, the pinned
      gateways and the native sources accepted from each;

   *  the consumption, reservation, same-action fence, pre-entry
      recovery, and cross-replica fencing mechanism, and how the
      boundary proves ownership of the records it releases;

   *  the canonical form of each material field and the effecting target
      identity configured on each boundary instance;

   *  the authoritative sources and matching rules used for
      reconciliation; and

   *  all direct, break-glass, administrator, alternate-protocol, and
      system-of-record paths that bypass the AEB implementation.

   An implementation placed beside a write path is not complete
   mediation.  A deployment MUST NOT claim complete mediation unless the
   protected system rejects all material alternate paths or subjects
   them to an equivalent boundary.  Observe-only operation MAY be useful
   during deployment, but it MUST NOT be described as enforcement.



Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 39]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


10.  Security Considerations

   *Cross-binding.* An attacker can splice a valid permit, approval,
   credential, or receipt for action A into a request for action B.
   Native verification before mapping, executor-owned action
   construction, and exact correspondence between the authorized
   operation and provider entry are required defenses.  A cross-format
   join also requires exact CAID matching.  A multi-leg requirement also
   requires a relying-party-pinned AEC evaluation.  Omitting a stage
   that the selected profile requires reopens the attack.

   *Projection gaps.* A permit covers the decision request built by the
   native mapping.  If the mapping omits a field on which the
   consequence depends, two different actions can receive the same
   permit, and treating that permit as authorization of the full
   executor action reopens cross-binding for the omitted field.
   Section 5.3 therefore requires every material field to be projected
   and operation-bound, or enforced by a separate pinned check.

   *Fresh authority for an uncertain action.* A native decision
   interface can return a new permit for each evaluation of an identical
   request.  If a provider call times out and the caller asks again, a
   gateway can obtain a fresh permit and assign a fresh native
   authorization identifier.  Native replay identity cannot detect this,
   because the authority really is new.  Without the same-action fence,
   the boundary would enter the provider a second time for an action
   whose first effect may already have occurred.  The fence of
   Section 5.10 keeps that path closed until authenticated evidence
   resolves the first attempt.

   *Relabelled authority.* If a replay derivation covers a native system
   or profile label, or a raw issuer spelling, a relying party that
   accepts one issuer under two labels or two spellings lets one grant
   be spent once per label or spelling.  Deriving the native replay
   identity from the authority namespace and native authorization
   identifier, and refusing pin sets in which one issuer, however
   spelled, does not map to exactly one namespace, removes that degree
   of freedom.  A pin set that declared two namespaces for one issuer
   value would let one grant be spent once per namespace, so Section 4
   refuses it.  Normalization cannot detect every alias: two issuer
   values that denote one authority but do not normalize equal need an
   explicitly shared namespace, or one grant can be spent once per
   value.








Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 40]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   *Namespace rotation.* Changing an authority namespace, or the issuer
   value of a pin that uses the default namespace, changes the native
   replay identity of every grant accepted under it.  A grant consumed,
   or still in flight, under the old identity then looks unused.
   Section 4 therefore requires in-flight attempts to be resolved and
   consumed grants to be unpresentable before the change.

   *Pre-entry stops.* A fence that only authenticated outcomes can
   release turns every crash before provider entry into a permanent
   refusal of that action.  Section 5.10 therefore requires a recovery
   operation, but releases only with proof that the attempt never
   entered the provider.  Releasing on a timeout or on local belief
   would reopen the second entry that the fence prevents.

   *Recovery racing a live attempt.* An attempt that looks stopped can
   be slow rather than dead.  If recovery observes a pre-entry record
   and a provider lookup that finds nothing, the original attempt can
   still enter DISPATCH_PENDING and dispatch a moment later.  A recovery
   that then used its lookup as evidence of FAILED would release the
   action key while the first dispatch is in flight, and a fresh attempt
   would enter the provider a second time.  Section 5.10 therefore makes
   recovery's own atomic not-entered transition the linearization point,
   and a recovery that loses that transition releases nothing and never
   reuses its lookup.

   *Inferred non-entry.* A released record that lacks provider evidence
   looks like an attempt that never entered the provider, but an attempt
   that entered and failed looks the same when its store does not return
   the evidence stored with it.  A boundary that inferred non-entry from
   that absence would release one-time authority for an attempt that did
   enter, and the same authority would reach the provider again.
   Section 5.10 therefore requires an explicit not-entered marker
   written by the not-entered transition itself and treats its absence
   as INDETERMINATE.

   *Evidence-agnostic verification.* A verifier that accepts any well-
   formed evidence, whatever it was asked, would accept a pre-entry "not
   received" lookup as a terminal FAILED for an attempt whose dispatch
   is still in flight, and the fence would release while the first
   effect can still occur.  Section 5.13 tells the verifier the purpose
   of each check and counts only a result that affirms that purpose for
   that attempt, and it requires presented evidence to carry its kind,
   so that reconciliation refuses a lookup presented under its own kind
   before any verifier runs.  These measures do not make the verifier's
   judgment checkable.  A verifier can restate the purpose it was given,
   or always affirm the terminal purpose, without evaluating the
   evidence, and the party that presents evidence can present a lookup
   under the terminal-outcome kind.  The boundary cannot detect either,



Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 41]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   and the two together still turn a "not received" lookup into a
   terminal FAILED while a dispatch is in flight.  That residual rests
   on the verifier and on the party that presents the evidence, which is
   why Section 5.13 states their obligations separately.

   *Unverified adapter results.* A provider adapter can report a timeout
   or a server error as FAILED although the effecting system committed
   the operation.  A boundary that released the action key on that
   report would admit a fresh attempt for an action that executed.
   Section 5.13 therefore requires the verifier on every boundary, for
   the result that the dispatch returns as well as for reconciliation.

   *Lost acknowledgements and non-affirmative answers.* A write can take
   effect even though its acknowledgement is lost, and a store interface
   can return a value that is neither success nor a clear refusal.
   Treating either as a clean failure and releasing records would free
   the action key of an attempt whose record says it may dispatch.
   Section 5.11 and Section 5.12 therefore count only the affirmative
   result as success and resolve every other answer through a durable
   read before any release.  A not-entered write whose acknowledgement
   is lost is the sharpest case: a later read can still show
   DISPATCH_PENDING while that write is pending, and a boundary that
   dispatched on that read would leave a record that says "not entered"
   for an attempt that entered, so recovery would release its one-time
   authority and the action could reach the effecting system twice.
   Section 5.12 therefore forbids dispatch after any not-entered write
   has been sent.

   *Record ownership.* Operation identifiers can be chosen by the
   caller.  An error path that releases a record by operation identifier
   alone can delete a live record of another attempt that uses the same
   identifier, reopening that attempt's authority and action key.
   Section 5.11 therefore limits release to records whose ownership the
   boundary can prove.  The same holds for a record that successive
   attempts can hold, such as a reservation keyed by an evaluation:
   recovering one attempt must not commit or release that record while a
   later attempt holds it.  Releasing records before the attempt's
   terminal or not-entered transition is confirmed has the same effect,
   because the transition can still fail and leave a live attempt
   without its records.

   *Recovery credential scope.* A recovery credential bound to an
   operation identifier or another value that several attempts share
   authorizes claims on every attempt that shares it, including a live
   one.  Section 5.14 therefore binds recovery authorization to exactly
   one attempt and requires every claimed record to be derived from that
   attempt.  Two further gaps have the same effect.  A claim that names
   no attempt cannot be checked against the records it covers, so it is



Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 42]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   refused before the authorization is evaluated.  Two boundaries that
   share one store, whether of the same kind or of different kinds, can
   assign the same attempt identifier, so the attempt identity includes
   an identifier of the boundary and, across kinds, a component that
   distinguishes them.

   *Instance fields.* An instance field lets two intentionally identical
   actions proceed.  It also lets any party that can choose a new
   instance value step around the same-action fence on a retry, because
   the fence cannot tell a deliberate second instance from a retry that
   carries a new instance value.  Profiles should bind the instance
   value inside the native authorization, set by the authorizing party,
   so that a retrying caller cannot mint a new instance without new
   authorization.

   *Action-digest scope.* If an action digest covered a field that the
   requester can vary without changing the consequence, such as a free-
   text memo or a request timestamp, the requester could vary it to
   obtain a new action key and step around the same-action fence.  The
   action digest therefore covers material fields only, and a profile
   that must carry such a field to the provider either declares it
   material or keeps it out of the action digest.  Two spellings of one
   material value have the same effect: without the canonical forms that
   Section 5.10 requires, a retry that writes an amount, a currency
   code, or a name differently obtains a new action key.

   *Gateway trust.* A native authorization handoff moves trust from the
   native issuer to the gateway.  A compromised or misconfigured gateway
   can attest permits that no PDP issued, or attest a full action digest
   that its mapping never evaluated.  Relying parties should pin the
   narrowest set of gateways, source labels, and issuers, retain
   historical pins across key rotation, and treat each accepted gateway
   as part of the enforcement trusted computing base.

   *Mutable context.* Intermediary-added headers and agent annotations
   are convenient but are not trustworthy merely because they arrived on
   an authenticated hop.  Every load-bearing field needs accepted end-
   to-end integrity coverage or independent derivation at the effect
   boundary.

   *Time of check and time of use.* The action passed to the executor
   must be the frozen action that was verified, matched, satisfied,
   authorized, and consumed or reserved.  Mutable aliases, provider
   defaults, exchange rates, destinations, branch heads, and policy
   epochs can change a consequence after approval; profiles must bind or
   revalidate them as material fields.





Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 43]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   *Replay and distributed state.* Process-local caches are insufficient
   where replicas can invoke the same effect.  Replay, consumption,
   reservation, same-action fence, and operation ownership state must be
   durable, atomic, and shared across every boundary instance that can
   reach the protected executor.

   *Freshness and revocation.* Expiration, nonce checks, credential
   status, authority status, and policy epoch are separate checks.  A
   fresh message does not make a revoked credential valid, and a current
   credential does not make old per-action evidence fresh.

   *Indeterminate effects.* Retrying after a timeout can duplicate a
   payment, mutation, disclosure, or physical action.  An invocation
   that might have reached the provider consumes the operation's retry
   right and holds its action key until authenticated reconciliation
   resolves the exact outcome.  Fresh authority does not reopen it.
   Caller assurances and unauthenticated webhooks do not resolve it.

   *Signature overclaiming.* A cryptographic signature can establish
   control of a key and integrity of covered content under a selected
   verification profile.  It does not inherently identify a human, prove
   human operation, prove comprehension, establish legal authority, or
   prove execution.

   *Boundary bypass.* A correct AEB implementation does not protect
   direct database credentials, alternate APIs, shell access,
   administrator consoles, side channels, or actuator paths that bypass
   it.  Deployment topology and credential placement are security
   properties, not implementation details.

11.  Privacy Considerations

   Action objects and evidence can expose identities, destinations,
   resources, policy choices, commercial relationships, and sensitive
   operational timing.  Deployments SHOULD minimize the evidence passed
   to the executor and retained in portable records, use opaque high-
   entropy references where appropriate, and avoid treating a plain
   digest of low-entropy personal data as anonymization.

   Same-action fence records retain action digests for as long as an
   action key stays occupied or closed.  A digest over low-entropy
   material fields can reveal the action to anyone who can enumerate
   candidate values; deployments SHOULD protect fence state accordingly.

   Reconciliation queries can disclose that an operation is disputed or
   uncertain.  They SHOULD be authenticated, authorized, rate-limited,
   and limited to the exact operation.  AEB does not require public
   disclosure of native evidence or local policy.



Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 44]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


12.  Relationship to EMILIA and Adjacent Work

   CAID [CAID] owns typed material-action identity and exact, relying-
   party-pinned cross-format mapping.  AEB invokes CAID after native
   verification only when independently encoded representations must be
   joined.  It does not extend CAID with trust semantics.

   AEC [AEC] owns heterogeneous evidence composition and the SATISFIED
   or UNSATISFIED result under a relying-party requirement.  AEB invokes
   AEC only when local policy requires multiple evidence legs, then
   preserves the separate authorization and effect-lifecycle decisions.
   The earlier Action Evidence Graph series [AEG] is replaced by AEC; an
   implementation following an older citation MUST NOT treat the
   superseded series as a second composition contract.

   AIMS, OAuth, AuthZEN, COAZ, and AP2 own their respective identity,
   delegation, authorization, protocol mapping, mandate, and native
   enforcement semantics.  AEB is a post-permit consequence-admission
   lifecycle at a covered effect boundary.  It does not create a
   parallel identity system, authorization server, PDP, mandate, or
   universal token.  The native authorization handoff reports a
   gateway's acceptance of a native permit; it is not a new permit and
   grants nothing beyond the native decision it reports.

   Authorization Receipts [RECEIPTS] define one native action-bound
   organizational approval artifact and its receipt-specific consumption
   semantics.  AEB does not make that format mandatory and does not
   generalize every native artifact into an EMILIA receipt.

   Static declarations and dynamic evidence challenges remain distinct
   protocol surfaces.  A manifest can advertise discovery metadata,
   while an Authorization Evidence Challenge can carry the live, action-
   bound refusal and acquisition instructions.  AEB owns the executor
   lifecycle in which those inputs are evaluated; it does not absorb or
   replace their wire formats.

   Qualification, revocation, remedy, and action-to-outcome continuity
   artifacts are optional native inputs or downstream records.  They
   retain their own semantics.  AEB composes them only through pinned
   verification, exact-action binding, local policy, durable custody,
   and authenticated reconciliation.

   A refusal MAY be represented by an action-bound signed refusal
   statement.  The refusal artifact records what the boundary refused
   and why; it MUST NOT be interpreted as proof that every bypass path
   was mediated, that delivery to a requester occurred, or that a later
   action was refused.




Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 45]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


13.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.  In particular, it creates no
   registry for native evidence types, lifecycle labels, refusal
   reasons, verifier adapters, action mappings, handoff encodings, or
   policy identifiers.

14.  Changes since -06

   *  Added the same-action in-flight fence (Section 5.10) for every
      attempt, whatever evidence path admits it.  A new attempt whose
      action key is held by a CONSUMED, RESERVED, DISPATCH_PENDING,
      INVOKED, or INDETERMINATE attempt, or closed by an EXECUTED one,
      is refused before provider entry, even when it carries fresh
      authority and a new operation identifier; native authorization
      paths report native_action_in_flight (or, once EXECUTED has closed
      the key, optionally native_action_already_executed).  The fence is
      durable, is occupied by an atomic conflict-detecting write before
      provider entry, and releases only on authenticated FAILED,
      reconciliation to FAILED, a confirmed pre-entry release, or
      authorized pre-entry recovery with proof that the attempt never
      entered the provider.  Pre-entry recovery is a separate operation
      that never continues into reconciliation.  Its own atomic not-
      entered transition is the linearization point: a recovery that
      loses that transition to the original attempt releases nothing,
      treats the attempt as INDETERMINATE, and never uses its lookup
      result as evidence of the outcome.  Action digests and effecting
      target identities are compared exactly, so profiles define
      canonical forms for material fields.  Instance fields let a
      profile admit intentionally repeated actions.

   *  Required an explicit not-entered marker, written by the not-
      entered transition itself, as the only proof besides a pre-
      dispatch state that an attempt did not enter the provider.  A
      closed record without the marker or terminal provider evidence is
      INDETERMINATE; the absence of evidence, or of an attempt record,
      is never proof of non-entry.  A boundary that has sent a write
      that could record an attempt as not entered, even one whose result
      it did not receive, never dispatches that attempt afterwards.

   *  Required every terminal outcome that commits or releases the
      records of a dispatched attempt, on every boundary and including
      the result that the dispatch itself returns, to be verified for
      that attempt by a relying-party-configured verifier that is told
      the purpose of the check and must affirm it.  A "not received"
      lookup is evidence only for pre-entry recovery, and a boundary
      without such a verifier keeps a dispatched attempt INDETERMINATE.
      Presented evidence carries its kind, and reconciliation and pre-



Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 46]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


      entry recovery each refuse the other kind before the verifier
      runs; a verifier or presenter that mislabels evidence remains
      outside what the boundary can detect.

   *  Required a boundary to release or close only records whose
      ownership it can prove, and to release, close, or commit an
      attempt's records only after the attempt's terminal or not-entered
      transition is confirmed.  Only the store's affirmative result
      counts as success, and a lost acknowledgement of the write that
      enters DISPATCH_PENDING is resolved through a durable read, never
      by releasing.  A record that successive attempts can hold is
      closed only for its current owner.  Recovery authorization is
      bound to exactly one attempt, every claimed record must be derived
      from that attempt, and one such authorization covers every record
      of the attempt.  A claim that names no attempt is refused before
      its authorization is evaluated, and the attempt identity is scoped
      to the boundary, so boundaries that share one store, of the same
      kind or of different kinds, cannot name each other's records.  A
      refusal whose writes are not all confirmed released is reported as
      INDETERMINATE.

   *  Defined the native replay identity once and made the stable replay
      identity of -06 and the native replay unit of Section 8.5 the same
      value.  Its inputs are the relying-party-pinned authority
      namespace, which defaults to the issuer, and the native
      authorization identifier.  Operation identifiers, wire labels such
      as the native system and profile, and the issuer value when a
      namespace is declared are excluded.  One issuer, including every
      issuer value equal to it after normalization, maps to exactly one
      namespace in a pin set, and a namespace change requires in-flight
      attempts and consumed grants to be drained first.  Provider
      idempotency keys derive from the native replay identity.

   *  Specified the native authorization handoff (Section 5.8): what a
      gateway attests, what the boundary verifies and in which order,
      how pins and status apply, and the shift of trust from the native
      issuer to the gateway.

   *  Corrected the AuthZEN and COAZ text (Section 7.2).  A permit
      covers only the inputs that the pinned mapping projects.  Binding
      of the full executor action comes from the effect-owning PEP's
      enforcement, or from a handoff over the full action digest, and
      never from the permit alone.  The semantic-loss report now covers
      native projections.







Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 47]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   *  Defined material field without depending on CAID, through the
      material-field inventory of the pinned native operation profile,
      and added terminology for PEP, PDP, effect-owning PEP, native
      operation profile, action digest, action instance, instance field,
      effecting target identity, authority namespace, and action key.

   *  Bound each reconciliation result to the attempt it resolves.

   *  Made the SCITT Permit text in Section 7.3 consistent with
      conditional CAID and AEC.

   *  Restored the definitions of the all_of and any_of members of EP-
      AEB-REQUIREMENT-v1 and defined the evidence-binding term.

   *  Updated references to AEC -06, Authorization Receipts -13, and
      WIMSE HTTP Signatures -07, pinned the COAZ and COAZ-MCP references
      to an openid/authzen commit, expanded acronyms on first use, and
      rewrote the implementation status to describe the direct native
      path, both reference Gate boundaries, and the synthetic lifecycle
      corpus.

   Revision -06 positioned AEB after native identity and authorization
   systems, made CAID conditional on a cross-format join and AEC
   conditional on a multi-leg evidence requirement, stated that an
   effect-owning PEP can accept a native authorization result without a
   second PDP, distinguished an authorized MCP or API request from a
   downstream provider effect, made the post-permit sequence explicit,
   cited the WIMSE AIMS working-group document, and added informative
   AuthZEN, COAZ, COAZ-MCP, and AP2 references.

15.  Implementation Status

   This section records the status of known implementations at the time
   of writing, following [RFC7942].  It is to be removed before
   publication as an RFC.

   The Apache-2.0 reference implementation provides relying-party-pinned
   adapter and mapping registries, multi-leg CAID joins, the boundary
   terms defined above, current-status verification, signed
   configuration-bound evaluation records, durable ownership-fenced one-
   time consumption, execution reservation and reconciliation, and
   signed refusal statements.  It also exposes a closed native-compiler
   report over the adapter contract, an AuthZEN-derived local PEP-
   observation profile, a source-pinned OAuth Transaction Authorization
   Challenge profile [OAUTH-TXN-CHALLENGE], a strict request-only
   profile over WPT-02 [WIMSE-WPT] and Transaction Tokens -11
   [OAUTH-TXN-TOKENS], and a WIMSE R10 compatibility matrix.  The
   AuthZEN-derived path verifies an EMILIA-signed local PEP observation,



Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 48]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   not an artifact defined or signed by AuthZEN.  It therefore does not
   count toward the two-external-native-profile gate.  OAuth transaction
   challenge and WPT plus Transaction Tokens are the two direct
   external-native candidates.  Their mappings have not been reviewed by
   the native protocol owners, the published profiles still need an
   audited match against every required hostile vector and paired
   control, and their OAuth adjacency requires an explicit protocol-
   diversity judgment before the generic gate can close.

   Direct native path.  At the commit cited by [EP-NATIVE-HANDOFF], the
   reference verifier package verifies a gateway-signed AEB-NATIVE-
   AUTHORIZATION-HANDOFF-v1 statement under pinned gateway keys and
   source pins, and derives the native replay identity itself from the
   pinned authority namespace and the native authorization identifier,
   as Section 5.8 and Section 5.9 require.  For wire compatibility with
   earlier releases, the signed handoff still carries a replay_unit
   computed over the native system and profile labels, the issuer, and
   the authorization identifier; the verifier checks it as part of the
   encoding and never uses it as the replay identity.  In addition to
   the replay identity, the reference Gate fences a key over that
   carried value computed for every source label and issuer value pinned
   under the grant's authority namespace, not only for the presented
   label, so authority consumed by an earlier release under one label
   stays fenced under every label still pinned; that key is never the
   only fence, and it covers only the labels pinned at the time.  The
   earlier release has no same-action fence, so the reference
   documentation requires that it not serve a durable state domain
   together with the current code.  The verifier's pin-set check refuses
   a pin set that does not map each issuer, including issuer values that
   are equal after the normalization of Section 4, to exactly one
   authority namespace, and the verifier derives no replay identity
   under such a pin set.

   At the same commit, both reference Gate boundaries, the native
   consequence boundary and the composed CAID and AEC boundary,
   implement the same-action fence of Section 5.10.  They derive one
   action key from the relying party identifier, the configured provider
   coordinates, and the action digest, so they fence each other when
   they share a store.  Each writes the attempt record before any record
   that occupies the action key, records an explicit not-entered marker
   with every not-entered transition, never calls the provider after it
   has sent a not-entered write and, when its start cannot be confirmed,
   sends none and holds every record, treats a closed record that
   carries neither that marker nor provider evidence as INDETERMINATE,
   never counts a store answer other than the exact affirmative result
   as success, and provides the pre-entry recovery of Section 5.10 as a
   separate mode of its reconciliation operation.  In that mode its own
   not-entered transition of the attempt record is the linearization



Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 49]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   point, a recovery that loses the transition returns INDETERMINATE
   without releasing anything, and the attempt's records are released
   only after the transition is confirmed.  Recovery authorization is
   scoped to one attempt, and a claimed record must be one derived from
   that attempt.  The composed boundary has no recovery for an
   evaluation reservation that a run made before it wrote its attempt
   record: such a reservation stays held, because nothing durable
   distinguishes a crashed run from a live one that has not yet written
   its record.

   The two boundaries key their records differently.  The native
   boundary keys each of its three reservations, for the operation, the
   native replay identity, and its occupation of the action key, by the
   attempt.  The composed boundary keys its occupation of the action key
   by the attempt, but keys its evaluation reservation by the
   evaluation, which successive attempts can present.  It commits that
   reservation for an attempt only on proof that the attempt still owns
   it: a durable read showing the attempt's own occupation of the action
   key still held, or, without such a read, the acknowledged close of
   that occupation.  Its pre-entry recovery releases only that
   occupation, leaving the evaluation reservation to the run that made
   it.  Where its consumption store offers no durable state read, or its
   attempt store offers none or does not declare that it stores and
   returns the not-entered marker, the composed boundary confirms a
   transition or release only by the store's exact affirmative result
   rather than by the authenticated durable read that Section 5.11
   requires.  It then treats only its own not-entered transition
   answered affirmatively as proof of a pre-entry stop, and because it
   cannot tell a recovery's not-entered transition from its own lost
   write, a run that loses that race keeps every record held and the
   action key occupied.  The reference PostgreSQL consumption store
   exposes a durable state read and an authorized recovery claim that
   both boundaries use after a restart.  Before the authorizer runs, the
   store refuses a claim that carries no recovery scope and a claim for
   any record other than one the scope names for its attempt.  The scope
   names the boundary kind and a configured boundary identifier as well
   as the attempt identifier, and every record keyed by the attempt
   includes both, so two boundaries that share one store and one attempt
   identifier, of the same kind or of different kinds, do not share
   claims.

   Evidence verification.  Both boundaries require an operator-
   configured verifier that receives the attempt, its provider
   idempotency key, and the purpose of the check, and that affirms an
   outcome only by restating all three; each refuses to be constructed
   without one.  Neither boundary accepts a terminal outcome for an
   attempt that reached DISPATCH_PENDING without that affirmation,
   including the result of its own provider call, so a provider



Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 50]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   adapter's report of FAILED alone never releases the action key.
   Evidence presented to reconciliation carries its kind in the
   boundary's input, and each mode refuses the other kind before the
   verifier runs.  The reference code checks that a verifier's answer
   restates the purpose, the attempt, and the idempotency key it was
   given, but it cannot tell whether the verifier evaluated the evidence
   or whether evidence was presented under the right kind: a lookup
   presented as a terminal outcome to a verifier that restates whatever
   it is asked is accepted as a terminal outcome.  The reference code
   does not itself authenticate an effecting system: the authenticated-
   evidence requirements of Section 5.10, Section 5.13, and Section 5.14
   are met only if the operator's verifier authenticates the provider
   evidence it accepts.  Neither boundary can tell whether an effecting
   system offers a lookup: both accept an indeterminate provider answer
   as the absence of one, so presenting the lookup result where a lookup
   exists is the operator's responsibility.

   The reference Gate implements no material-field inventory and no
   canonical-form equivalence.  It compares the caller-supplied action
   digest and the configured provider coordinates exactly, so the
   canonicalization that Section 5.10 requires is performed by the
   caller or its profile.  This code is same-team reference code, not an
   independent implementation, and has no known production deployment.

   Synthetic lifecycle corpus.  A 26-case corpus [EP-LIFECYCLE-CORPUS]
   runs four synthetic native-result profiles (AuthZEN with COAZ-MCP,
   AP2, an OAuth Transaction Token, and a locally signed mandate)
   through one post-authorization lifecycle model.  Its runner
   implements its own store and boundary model and does not execute the
   reference verifier or Gate packages, so its results describe that
   model rather than the shipped code.  It includes cases with fresh
   native authority for an action whose first attempt is INDETERMINATE
   or has EXECUTED, and a case that relabels one grant under a second
   source label.

   The informative EP-FIELD-ORIGIN-v0.1 profile is evaluated before
   admission in the reference Gate.  Its Gap 6 implementation profile
   has 14 deterministic cases, including disallowed field origins,
   unknown origin, profile substitution, an unpinned transformation, and
   the positive case in which untrusted content supplies only a bounded
   memo field.  Conformance vectors and adversarial tests cover selected
   reference paths; the full conformance set above remains future
   conformance work and is not established by this revision.  These
   same-team artifacts are not an independent implementation, are not an
   adoption claim, and do not prove that a deployment mediates every
   effect path.

16.  References



Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 51]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


16.1.  Normative References

   [AEC]      Schrock, I., "Authorization Evidence Chains: Composing
              Heterogeneous Agent-Action Evidence (EP-AEC)", Work in
              Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-schrock-ep-authorization-
              evidence-chain-06, 6 September 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-schrock-ep-
              authorization-evidence-chain/>.

   [BCP14]    Internet Engineering Task Force, "Key Words for Use in
              RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels", BCP 14, 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp14>.

   [CAID]     Schrock, I., "The Canonical Action Identifier (CAID)",
              Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-schrock-canonical-
              action-identifier-02, 6 August 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-schrock-canonical-
              action-identifier/>.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

16.2.  Informative References

   [AEG]      Schrock, I., "Action Evidence Graph for Consequential
              Agent Actions", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-
              schrock-ep-action-evidence-graph-00, July 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-schrock-ep-action-
              evidence-graph/>.

   [AP2]      Google Agentic Commerce, "Agent Payments Protocol (AP2),
              v0.2 CheckoutMandate and PaymentMandate", 2026,
              <https://github.com/google-agentic-commerce/AP2/tree/
              e1ea56db72a6385bce3e5c1112b3a56ce60acb43>.

   [AUTHZEN-API]
              Gazitt, O., Brossard, D., and A. Tulshibagwale,
              "Authorization API 1.0", OpenID AuthZEN Final
              Specification, 11 January 2026,
              <https://openid.net/specs/authorization-api-1_0.html>.





Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 52]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   [AUTHZEN-COAZ]
              Olivier, A. and A. Tulshibagwale, "COAZ: A Framework for
              Mapping Information Models to AuthZEN Authorization
              Requests - Draft 1", OpenID AuthZEN Working Group Draft 1,
              13 February 2026, <https://github.com/openid/authzen/
              blob/78a5165a0048895a345e4ac5b0f2b9c7904bb110/profiles/
              authzen-coaz-framework-1_0.md>.  Editor's copy in the
              openid/authzen repository at commit
              78a5165a0048895a345e4ac5b0f2b9c7904bb110, retrieved 24
              September 2026. Work in progress; not a final
              specification.

   [AUTHZEN-COAZ-MCP]
              Tulshibagwale, A. and A. Olivier, "COAZ-MCP: COAZ Binding
              for the Model Context Protocol - Draft 1", OpenID AuthZEN
              Working Group Draft 1, 13 February 2026,
              <https://github.com/openid/authzen/
              blob/78a5165a0048895a345e4ac5b0f2b9c7904bb110/profiles/
              authzen-coaz-mcp-binding-1_0.md>.  Editor's copy in the
              openid/authzen repository at commit
              78a5165a0048895a345e4ac5b0f2b9c7904bb110, retrieved 24
              September 2026, which includes the operation-binding
              change merged on 10 September 2026. Work in progress; not
              a final specification.

   [EP-FIELD-ORIGIN]
              EMILIA Protocol, "EP-FIELD-ORIGIN-v0.1 Informative
              Implementation Profile and Gap 6 Runner", 15 August 2026,
              <https://github.com/emiliaprotocol/emilia-
              protocol/tree/71358caf0c4d2459958efbbdda3530a0e02889e5/
              conformance/composition/gap6-execution-evidence-v0.1>.

   [EP-LIFECYCLE-CORPUS]
              EMILIA Protocol, "Consequence-Admission Lifecycle
              Composition Corpus v0.1", 25 September 2026,
              <https://github.com/emiliaprotocol/emilia-
              protocol/tree/b1b268e7d0538a9e22e379ddb06f55149d352c3b/
              conformance/composition/consequence-admission-lifecycle-
              v0.1>.  Repository commit
              b1b268e7d0538a9e22e379ddb06f55149d352c3b.  Synthetic same-
              team corpus.

   [EP-NATIVE-HANDOFF]
              EMILIA Protocol, "AEB-NATIVE-AUTHORIZATION-HANDOFF-v1
              Reference Encoding and Native Consequence Boundary", 25
              September 2026, <https://github.com/emiliaprotocol/emilia-
              protocol/blob/b1b268e7d0538a9e22e379ddb06f55149d352c3b/
              docs/protocol/aeb-native-authorization-handoff-v1.md>.



Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 53]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


              Repository commit
              b1b268e7d0538a9e22e379ddb06f55149d352c3b.  Same-team
              reference code; informative only.

   [MUNOZ-PERMIT]
              Munoz, C., "A SCITT Profile for Pre-Execution AI Action
              Authorization Records", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft,
              draft-munoz-scitt-permit-profile-01, July 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-munoz-scitt-
              permit-profile/>.

   [MUNOZ-WIMSE-EVIDENCE]
              Munoz, C., "Signed Authorization-Evidence Records for
              WIMSE-Authorized AI Agent Actions", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-munoz-wimse-authorization-evidence-
              01, July 2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-
              munoz-wimse-authorization-evidence/>.

   [OAUTH-TXN-CHALLENGE]
              Rosomakho, Y., Campbell, B., McGuinness, K., and P.
              Kasselman, "OAuth Transaction Authorization Challenge",
              Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-rosomakho-oauth-
              txn-challenge-00, 25 June 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-rosomakho-oauth-
              txn-challenge/>.

   [OAUTH-TXN-TOKENS]
              Tulshibagwale, A., Fletcher, G., and P. Kasselman,
              "Transaction Tokens", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft,
              draft-ietf-oauth-transaction-tokens-11, 30 July 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-oauth-
              transaction-tokens/>.

   [PEDIGREE] Rampalli, K., "PEDIGREE: Verifiable Delegation Identity
              for Agentic AI Systems", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft,
              draft-rampalli-pedigree-00, April 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-rampalli-
              pedigree/>.

   [RECEIPTS] Schrock, I., "Authorization Receipts for High-Risk Agent
              Actions", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-schrock-
              ep-authorization-receipts-13, 12 September 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-schrock-ep-
              authorization-receipts/>.







Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 54]

Internet-Draft          Action Evidence Boundary          September 2026


   [RFC7942]  Sheffer, Y. and A. Farrel, "Improving Awareness of Running
              Code: The Implementation Status Section", BCP 205,
              RFC 7942, DOI 10.17487/RFC7942, July 2016,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7942>.

   [RFC9421]  Backman, A., Ed., Richer, J., Ed., and M. Sporny, "HTTP
              Message Signatures", RFC 9421, DOI 10.17487/RFC9421,
              February 2024, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9421>.

   [WIMSE-AIMS]
              Kasselman, P., Lombardo, J., Rosomakho, Y., Campbell, B.,
              Steele, N., and A. Parecki, "AI Identity Management
              System", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-
              wimse-aims-00, 15 September 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-wimse-aims/>.

   [WIMSE-HTTP]
              Salowey, J. A. and Y. Sheffer, "WIMSE Workload-to-Workload
              Authentication with HTTP Signatures", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-wimse-http-signature-07, 20
              September 2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-
              ietf-wimse-http-signature/>.

   [WIMSE-WPT]
              Campbell, B. and A. Schwenkschuster, "WIMSE Workload Proof
              Token", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-
              wimse-wpt-02, 27 August 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-wimse-wpt/>.

Acknowledgments

   External review sharpened the boundaries between workload and message
   integrity, per-action authorization evidence, credential status,
   human operation, and executor-owned effect control.  Those
   distinctions are load-bearing in this document.  Acknowledgment does
   not imply endorsement.

Author's Address

   Iman Schrock
   EMILIA Protocol, Inc.
   United States of America
   Email: team@emiliaprotocol.ai








Schrock                   Expires 29 March 2027                [Page 55]
